The Project Gutenberg eBook of A little maid of Picardy
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: A little maid of Picardy

Author: Amy Ella Blanchard

Illustrator: Frank T. Merrill

Release date: May 29, 2024 [eBook #73722]

Language: English

Original publication: Boston: W. A. Wilde Company, 1919

Credits: Carla Foust, David Edwards, David E. Brown, Rod Crawford, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A LITTLE MAID OF PICARDY ***





A LITTLE MAID OF PICARDY




BOOKS BY AMY E. BLANCHARD


_REVOLUTIONARY SERIES_

  A GIRL OF ’76. A STORY OF THE EARLY PERIOD OF THE WAR FOR
    INDEPENDENCE. 331 pages.

  A REVOLUTIONARY MAID. A STORY OF THE MIDDLE PERIOD OF THE WAR FOR
    INDEPENDENCE. 321 pages.

  A DAUGHTER OF FREEDOM. A STORY OF THE LATTER PERIOD OF THE WAR FOR
    INDEPENDENCE. 312 pages.

  Price, $1.50 net each.


_IN THE GIRLS’ BOOKSHELF_

  ELIZABETH, BETSY AND BESS. A STORY. 284 pages.

  ELIZABETH, BETSY AND BESS--SCHOOL-MATES. A STORY. 308 pages.

  THE CAMP FIRE GIRLS OF BRIGHTWOOD. A STORY OR HOW THEY KINDLED THEIR
    FIRE AND KEPT IT BURNING. 309 pages.

  FAGOTS AND FLAMES. A STORY OF WINTER CAMP FIRES. 306 pages.

  IN CAMP WITH THE MUSKODAY CAMP FIRE GIRLS. A STORY OF SUMMER CAMP
    FIRES BY CABIN AND LAKE. 310 pages.

  A GIRL SCOUT OF RED ROSE TROOP. A STORY FOR GIRL SCOUTS. 320 pages.

  A LITTLE MAID OF PICARDY. STORY OF A LITTLE REFUGEE IN FRANCE. 338
    pages.

  Each illustrated by Colored Frontispiece and with Colored Jacket.

  Cloth Bound. Price, $1.35 net each.

  _Also Books in the AMERICAN GIRL SERIES._




[Illustration]




  A Little Maid of
  Picardy

  BY
  AMY E. BLANCHARD

  _ILLUSTRATED BY_
  FRANK T. MERRILL

  [Illustration]

  W. A. WILDE COMPANY
  BOSTON           CHICAGO




  _Copyrighted, 1919_,
  BY W. A. WILDE COMPANY
  _All rights reserved_

  A LITTLE MAID OF PICARDY




Contents


      I. A GARDEN GROWS                 9

     II. THE FIRST BREAK               22

    III. WE GO                         37

     IV. A LONELY NIGHT                53

      V. WELL MET                      68

     VI. MORE WAYS THAN ONE            83

    VII. A STRANGE GARRET              99

   VIII. A BIT OF SKY                 113

     IX. SHOES                        129

      X. NENETTE AND RINTINTIN        146

     XI. A DOG AND HIS DAY            166

    XII. TERROR BY NIGHT              182

   XIII. OLD FRIENDS AND NEW          198

    XIV. LE-COIN-DU-PRES              215

     XV. GASPARD                      234

    XVI. UPS AND DOWNS                250

   XVII. THE RETURN                   266

  XVIII. OLD FOLKS AT HOME            283

    XIX. JOY                          303

     XX. THE END IS PEACE             321




A Little Maid of Picardy




CHAPTER I

A GARDEN GROWS


  “Il y a dans ce village
  Une enfant a l’œil noir.
  C’est Jeanne au frais visage;
  Elle chant matin et soir.
  Elle est rieuse et belle,
  Et dans nos environs
  Tout le monde l’appelle
  La fillette au chansons.
      Tra la la--”

sang Lucie as she sat on a stone bench under a sheltering cherry tree.
The “tra la la” suddenly ceased at a stir of the branches on the other
side. Lucie glanced up with a twinkle in her eyes and changed the song
to “Way down upon the Swanee river.”

“Lucie, Lucie, what are those funny words you sing?” called some one
from over the wall.

“_Ma foi_, what ignorance!” returned Lucie with an uplift of her
eyebrows. “As if one could not tell. Did you never hear ‘the Old Folks
at Home’?”

“What is this ‘Ole folk zat ome?’ I do not know,” returned the voice.

Lucie laughed. “Come over, come over, Annette, and I will teach it to
you. It will be droll to hear you sing it.”

Annette climbed nimbly to the top of the stone wall, and presently
dropped to her feet, avoiding bushes and vines in order to make her way
to where Lucie was sitting. “It is droll enough to hear you sing it,”
she remarked. “It is in English of course.”

“American English; a song my mother often sings and which every one
knows over there in the United States.”

“And you will teach it to me, this song? I shall like to sing it for
grandfather. How he will be amused when he hears it.”

“Then repeat after me.”

This Annette essayed to do, but her efforts brought such peals of
laughter from Lucie that she stopped with a pout. “How you are a silly
one,” exclaimed she. “Me, I am all French. Can I then be expected to
know English? If you will perhaps write the words for me I may then be
able to say them, but when you speak so fast and run the words together
at such a rate I cannot follow you.” She produced a piece of paper and
a stub of pencil. Lucie carefully wrote out the first line, handed the
paper back to Annette and waited with a gleeful smile.

“Vay don oopon ze Svanay reebair,” began Annette reading slowly. Then
down fluttered the paper. “I cannot,” she cried. “This English is a
monster! a Turkey! a pig! a thing impossible. I do not see how you can
understand or speak it.”

“I speak it as well as I do French,” returned Lucie proudly. “Mamma
wishes that I shall, for one day, behold! we go to her home to that
same United States, then before my relations I shall not feel ashamed.
I should consider myself a silly one if I could not understand them nor
they me.”

“For me then there will arise no occasion for feeling shame, and
therefore there is no need to learn this tongue, for I have no
relatives in that country,” returned Annette complacently. “Would you
not, Lucie, prefer to be all French. Is it not a sorrow to you that you
are part English?”

“No, no,” Lucie shook her head. “I am not English, and I am very proud
of my American blood and that I have American aunts and uncles. As
for my mother, she tells me that she became French when she married a
Frenchman, so this is now her country as well as my father’s and mine.
I adore my France where I was born and where I hope I may die when
my hour comes. It is the land of my father, my mother, my dear old
grandfather. No, you cannot say I am English, Annette.”

This outbreak entirely satisfied Annette, who quite willingly changed
the subject when her friend proposed that they should go further into
the garden to see a certain rose now blooming gloriously. “Is it not
magnificent?” Lucie asked as they stopped before the bush.

Annette viewed it with admiration. “It is truly,” she acknowledged,
“more beautiful than my grandfather’s. Now he will be envious, that
poor grandfather, for ours has not half the number of blooms.”

“They are very droll, those two old ones, your grandfather and mine,”
remarked Lucie. “To hear them argue over a bed of cabbages one would
think them the most important things in the world. They are never so
happy as when they are discussing the merits of their gardens. For my
part I cannot see that one is better than the other. They grow; there
is enough and more than enough for our use, so what does it matter?
Here comes Paulette now to gather vegetables. Shall we help her to pick
the peas, Annette?”

“And shell them afterward?”

“Why yes, if you will.”

Paulette, rugged of feature, brown of skin, sharp-eyed and capable,
came forward with a basket on her arm. She wore a stuff skirt, a huge
apron, a stout sacque and a little cap. Her face was rather grave and
stern until she smiled, then her expression showed a kindly humor.

“May we help you gather the peas, Paulette?” asked Lucie, balancing
herself on one foot.

Paulette scanned the vines. “Yes, if you will be careful to pick only
the well-filled pods. One may not take those not fully matured. Guard
well against that.”

“We know and we will be careful,” returned Lucie and forthwith the
three set to work, the girls using their aprons to hold the gathered
pods, Paulette giving them once in a while a sharp eye to see that they
performed their task properly.

At last when peas, carrots, onions, lettuce had been gathered Paulette
carried them into the house and the little girls sat down again on the
stone bench to shell the peas. Paulette meantime bustled in and out
to bring water, to wash the lettuce and swing it around and around in
a wire basket that it might be freed from all moisture, to scrape the
little potatoes, to pick over the herbs for the ragout. The warm air
was scented with odors from the garden, the rose-bushes, the clambering
vines and mellowing fruit. The two girls chattered away like magpies
about pleasant, homely things: their lessons, their pets, the growing
garden, the good curé, the kind nuns. Outside the white wall the noises
from the long street seemed only sociable sounds. Carts rattled along,
children called to one another, men tramped home from the factories to
their midday meal, stopping their whistling or singing to greet some
friend. All this made a pleasant accompaniment to the drone of bees,
and the drowsy crooning of hens in the chicken yard. There were homely,
suggestive sounds, too, from the kitchens.

The two little girls, Lucie Du Bois and Annette Le Brun, were great
friends, as might be surmised since they were next door neighbors.
Lucie, her father and mother, her grandfather, Paulette, their maid and
her son Jean, occupied a comfortable, square house whose red-tiled roof
could be seen when winter stripped the leaves from the trees, but which
in summer was almost hidden by green. A white stucco wall separated the
garden from that of the Le Bruns, but the wall was not an impassable
barrier, for the two girls, by means of a ladder, or, when the ladder
was lacking, by means of overhanging branches, were able to climb back
and forth.

Dark-haired, brown-eyed Annette lived with her grandparents. She was
a bright, ardent little soul, adoring her best friend, Lucie, who
excelled her in imagination and sometimes surprised her by her vivid
way of telling things. Lucie, too, had dark eyes like her father’s,
but her hair was a soft golden brown like her mother’s. She was about
fourteen, Annette a year older. While the latter had legends of the
saints at her tongue’s end, Lucie had far wider information concerning
more modern tales. She never tired of hearing from her mother stories
of the Indians and of her pioneer forefathers. These stories she would
retell to Annette, who listened wide-eyed. Moreover there was a small
collection of her mother’s girlhood books which Lucie was permitted to
have and from which she gained a knowledge not only of her mother’s
native tongue, but of things American. Therefore to Annette she was
a very superior person whose companionship she greatly enjoyed, and
preferred to that of any other girl she knew.

The big factory with the tall chimney over to the west belonged to
the Du Boises; that on the other side of the town to the Le Bruns.
Grandfather Du Bois had retired from active business, but still made a
daily visit to the rooms where clattering machines whizzed and whirled
all day long. He liked to talk over affairs with his son who had taken
his place in the business. Monsieur Le Brun still remained head of his
firm, having no son to succeed him, though he often spoke of the day
when Annette should marry and a _petit fils_ should relieve him of his
cares.

The task of shelling the peas was far from being a disagreeable one,
for while their fingers split the fresh pods and raked the pale green
globes from them, the two girls chattered incessantly and at last began
the subject which they often discussed but never failed to enjoy. This
time it was Annette who began by asking: “Have you really made up your
mind which saint you prefer?”

“For me it is Saint Elizabeth of Hungary or Saint Ursula,” replied
Lucie. “I adore that story of the loaves of bread turned into roses,
and I also like Saint Ursula for she was of Brittany. It must have been
wonderful to see her leading her eleven thousand virgins.”

“You would like to do that sort of thing, wouldn’t you, my Lucie? Have
you no saint of your own country that you would like above all others?”

“My own country? France is my country.”

“I mean that country of the United States that you are always talking
about.”

“How you are foolish,” returned Lucie crossly. “Why do you try to
separate me from the land of my birth? I think you are very unkind. I
don’t believe you want to acknowledge me as a compatriot.”

Annette looked a trifle abashed. She had really meant only to tease.
“Well,” she began to hunt around for an excuse, “you are continually
telling me of its wonders, and you speak of the characters in those
story books as if you were intimately acquainted with them, that Jo and
her sisters in that ‘Leetle Veemen’ you so like.”

“Of course I am intimately acquainted with them, for I have read that
book many times. One may have friends anywhere, but that does not mean
one must adopt their countries.”

This argument proved Lucie’s case and Annette changed the subject back
again to the favorite saints. “If you will have a sweet saint of France
there is Saint Genevieve,” she remarked. “It was she whose prayers
delivered Paris from Attila the Hun, you remember.”

“Yes, she is very nice,” Lucie acknowledged somewhat flippantly, not
being in a mood to accept any suggestion, “but you see every one knows
about her. I should like to have as my favorite some one more uncommon.
I think I shall ask Sister Marie Ottilia to find me a saint that I can
feel very near to because she has not too many followers.” She set the
subject aside with an air of finality, and Annette felt that this time
she had really gone too far in her desire to tease.

The two were silent till at last Lucie said: “There, Annette, these
are the last. I will take them in. The pods Paulette can give to the
animals. See, already my pigeons are coming for a share of the peas. I
can give them only a few, for Paulette will scold if she thinks I am
wasting them. She has a sharp eye for food, that Paulette. Wait for me,
Annette, I will bring a book.”

Emboldened by this overture of peace Annette ventured to say: “Not
‘Leetle Veemen.’ I cannot understand that.”

Lucie paused with the brown basin of peas in her hand and threw a
laughing glance over her shoulder. “Perhaps you would better like
something of Dickens,” she said.

“O, that Deekens! He is an impossible!” cried Annette, throwing out her
hands with a gesture of rejection. “Not that, I beg of you.” Lucie made
no reply but continued on her way to the kitchen. She was gone some
time but at last returned with a green book under arm. She showed the
title on the back to Annette with a gleeful laugh.

“_Ma foi_ but you are a tease,” cried Annette. “I will not remain. I
will go home at once.” She jumped up in order to carry out her decision.

Lucie forced her back upon the seat. “And why am I not to tease as well
as you? To read does not hurt one’s feelings, but to be denied one’s
country does,” she said.

“Did I really hurt your feelings?” Annette asked contritely.

“Would it not hurt your feelings if one declared you did not belong to
your native country, to France?”

“It would most surely,” Annette was obliged to confess, “but I was only
teasing my Lucie. As for this Deekens, he bewilders, he confuses me. Is
it because you are angry with me and wish me to go that you bring this
so impossible book?”

“But this you know could not be,” Lucie assured her. “Wait till I have
told you. I asked my mother to suggest something from her books which
would be interesting to both you and me and she gave me this which
she tells me is quite unlike any of the others of this Dickens. It is
called ‘A Tale of Two Cities’ and is about the French Revolution. The
heroine has my own name of Lucie. My mother says the story is exciting
beyond words.”

“_Voila une autre chose_,” returned Annette, accepting the situation
without further protest. “Let us then proceed.”

Usually Lucie’s methods of translation were very free, to say the
least. Her way was to skim over a page as rapidly as possible,
then relate the contents in her own words. Anything that appeared
uninteresting she skipped, consequently the abridged tale which
Annette heard was shorn of many of its features and she was frequently
bewildered in trying to keep track of the plot and the characters.
If she complained of this Lucie would laboriously try to translate
literally, which was more bewildering still. Both girls, however,
enjoyed such translations as Lucie took pains to make clear. The usual
manner would run something like this, Lucie turning over the leaves
rapidly:

“It was in the year 1775. There was a man in a coach who had a message
brought to him. He was to meet a young lady at Dover.”

“A young man was this?” Annette queried.

“No, an old. He was a banker or something. He had to tell the young
lady that her father was living.”

“Didn’t she want him to be living?”

“That I do not know yet, but anyway she thought him dead. He had been
in prison for eighteen years.”

“_Ma foi_, Lucie, for what was he imprisoned? He must have been a very
bad man. Eighteen years! A lifetime.”

“It doesn’t say why he was imprisoned. He may not have been a wicked
person. Anyway they went to see him. He was in a tower making shoes.”

“Shoes? My Lucie, why should he make shoes?”

“O, just to pass away the time.”

“But so curious is this. It would not entertain me to spend my time
making shoes.”

“It might if you wanted to pass away the time and could find nothing
else to do. I should think it rather interesting myself.”

“For me I should prefer something else; dresses, maybe, or hats. I
should not mind at all making hats.”

“Men’s hats or ladies’ hats? Straw hats or what?”

“O, not men’s hats of course, beautiful hats upon which one could use
ribbons and lace flowers.”

“Where could you get all those things if you were in prison?”

“I haven’t an idea. I suppose in the same manner that the man got
leather for the shoes. Does it tell?”

“Not yet. Maybe it will. We shall see.” So the tale went on till the
midday meal was ready and a voice from the other side of the wall
called: “Annette, Annette, _le dejeuner est servi_.” Then over the wall
climbed Annette, leaving the fortunes of Lucie Manette, Evremonde and
Sidney Carton to be followed another day.




CHAPTER II

THE FIRST BREAK


“Mousse! Mousse! Where is Mousse?” Lucie began calling her pet cat as
she ran from kitchen to dining-room to library. At the door of the
last named room she stopped short to look around upon the little group
gathered there. “Such serious faces, all of you,” she exclaimed. “What
is it? Mamma, papa, grandfather, you look as if you had lost your last
friends.” She perched upon her grandfather’s knee and began pulling his
moustache so as to make the corners of his mouth turn up. “Smile, _cher
grandpère_,” she said.

He took her hands gently away and held them in his. “It is a time to
be serious, my child,” he said. “One cannot smile when there is war to
face. I who remember 1870 cannot smile now.”

“War? Not for us, not France. What has she done?” Lucie looked around
incredulously.

“She has done nothing but be her true self,” said her grandfather
shaking his head sadly.

“But it is not near, this war. It will not touch us here in our home.”

“Alas, it is very near. The Germans have invaded Belgium, and are
marching on to Paris where, they boast, they will eat their Christmas
dinner.”

“Oh but,” Lucie began, looking toward her father, whose face wore a
stern, set look. “Papa,” she cried springing up and throwing herself
into his arms, “you are going! It is this that makes you all look so.
You are going to the war, to be a soldier. O, papa!”

He stroked her hair softly. “Yes, little one, I am going as all good
Frenchmen will go. We are not ready, we of France, but we shall do our
best. For this hour Germany has been preparing for forty years. She is
the one country which desires and is ready for war. The rest of us have
been taken unawares but--” He shrugged his shoulders.

“And is it soon, at once, that you must go?” Lucie asked tremulously.

“At once. There is no time to lose. You must be brave, little one, and
cheer mamma. You are a daughter of France, remember, and her women do
not quail before danger. You will remember that and be brave always,
always, no matter what comes?” He took her face between his hands and
kissed her on each cheek.

Lucie winked back the tears and, though her voice quavered, she
answered: “I will be brave, always, always, papa. I will remember.”

“That is my dear daughter. Try to help all you can. There will be much
to be done and you must do your part.”

Lucie looked across the room. “But grandfather is not going,” she said.

He lifted his head with a sudden, proud gesture. “Not yet, my pigeon,
but if I am called I shall answer in spite of that old wound the
Prussians gave me nearly fifty years ago.”

“And Jean, does Paulette’s Jean go?” Lucie continued her questions.

“Oh, yes, Jean must go,” her father told her. “He has enlisted already
in my company.”

“Poor Paulette!” Lucie looked grave. She realized that it was indeed no
time to make merry.

And in the days which followed she realized this still more. Her mother
went about with a faraway look in her eyes. Paulette was grimmer and
more silent. Grandfather Du Bois talked much with his neighbor, Mons.
Le Brun, of that other war in which both had taken part. Lucie caught
such sentences as: “They shall not pass. Never again shall it be,
never, never,” spoken fiercely. Then there would be long silences as
the two old men sat under the trees in the peaceful garden.

It was with contradictory emotions that the little girl saw her father
march away with Jean, Pierre, Louis and François, youths of the town
whom she had always known. They were all singing the Marseillaise.
Lucie was thrilled as she heard them. Her grandfather and Mons. Le
Brun stood stiffly saluting the flag as it passed. Madame Du Bois made
a sweeping curtsy. Paulette followed her example, and, in her turn so
did Lucie. Her heart beat high as she saw her father in his captain’s
uniform leading his men. There were many others on the street waving
handkerchiefs and crying “_Au revoir_.” Old men and boys were shouting
“_Vive la France!_” or “_Brave garçons!_” As the rat-a-tat of the drums
and the singing died away, and the floating flag became a mere speck,
Lucie felt that she could not keep back her tears. She glanced at her
mother, on whose face was a strange, exalted look. Lucie grasped her
mother’s hand. It was as cold as ice, but she held Lucie’s tightly
and smiled down at her. A few of the women were weeping though they
continued to cheer mechanically as the tears coursed down their cheeks.
Madame Du Bois’s eyes were tearless, and Lucie, who felt the moisture
must overflow in her own eyes, choked back the lump in her throat and
smiled into the face above her.

“They will come back victorious,” exclaimed her grandfather bravely.

“If they come back at all,” remarked Paulette dejectedly.

Thereupon the lump in Lucie’s throat grew bigger and forced from her
eyes the tears which she had been striving to keep back.

She broke from her mother, rushed into the house and up, up into the
farthest corner of the attic where she could have out her cry without
being seen. Her father! Her beloved father gone, gone! She might never
see him again on earth. She could not bear to think of it! In the
excitement of the past few days, in the glamour of beholding uniforms,
hearing drums beating and seeing flags flying she had scarcely realized
that he was going into dangers, but now that part was done with, that
exciting part which had buoyed her up, and ahead were only days of
waiting and of anxiety.

The sobs grew less and less, however, as she remembered her promise
to be brave. She repeated it over and over again: “I will be brave,
always, always. I will, papa.” She wiped her eyes and gazed seriously
out of the small window by which she sat. The pigeons were strutting
over the red-tiled roof, making their queer cooing sounds. Down in the
garden, walking back and forth, back and forth, she saw her grandfather
slowly pacing.

Presently something soft and furry rubbed against her knee. “You,
Mousse!” she cried. “You have searched me out. What a cat indeed!
How did you know where to find me?” She gathered the little purring
creature into her arms, gently stroked his head till he settled down
in her lap; then she sat there very still for some time, thinking,
thinking, until looking down into the garden she saw Paulette come out
with two buckets and go toward the well.

“The poor Paulette,” exclaimed Lucie, “she will now have to do Jean’s
work since he is no longer here. Behold grandfather! he has taken a
bucket. He is helping her. What a thing indeed! I, too, should help;
it is what I promised papa I would do. I had forgotten all that might
happen with Jean gone, that Paulette would have double work unless we
others should do some of it. Come, Mousse, we must go down.”

She carried the small creature with her down to the garden, calling as
she went: “What can I do? What can I do? Paulette, is there nothing I
can do to help?”

“To be sure there is something,” replied Paulette, setting down her
bucket, a smile relaxing the gravity of her face. “You can feed the
fowls.”

“Truly I can,” replied Lucie. “I know where their food is. Come with me
to feed the fowls,” she said to her grandfather who was setting down
the second bucket.

“And do you think I have nothing better to do than help you feed the
fowls?” he asked, smiling at her indulgently.

“No doubt you have, but it will not take long, and it is so much more
entertaining when one has a companion to whom one can say: ‘Is not the
speckled hen greedy?’ or, ‘What a coward is the red rooster!’”

“To-day then it is allowed that you make those remarks to me, but after
this--” He shook his head.

“After this why can you not?”

“Because, my child, I take my son’s place at the factory, as must many
an old man do.”

Lucie looked thoughtfully across at the neighboring garden. “Mons. Le
Brun will not have to change his habits, but that other grandfather of
Annette’s must do so, I suppose, for her uncles and cousins will go to
the war, no doubt.”

Her grandfather drew a quick sigh. “Yes, all of us can do our part in
one way or another. Well, in my case it is not as if I were without
experience. Come, let us go to those fowls, and then something else.
One must not be an idler these days.”

The two went to the little shed at the back of the garden where they
found the grain to scatter for the waiting fowls. The pigeons, too
must have their share. These were so tame that they perched on Lucie’s
shoulder, ate from her hands, sat upon her arm when she held it
out. All the time she chattered away, sometimes to her grandfather,
sometimes to the creatures about her.

The air was sweet and fresh coming from across gardens. Even the
smoking factories could not overcome the odors of blossoming plants,
while the clatter of machinery was less in evidence than the laughter
of children, the rippling talk of young girls, the shouts of boys. This
evening, however, there was less of laughter than usual. From so many
of the houses had gone forth a father, a son, a brother, a husband to
the war, and anxious foreboding filled the hearts of the older people.

Lucie carried the empty basin into the house, leaving her grandfather
with head thoughtfully bent and hands behind him to resume his pacing
of the garden walk. Madame Du Bois was busy in the house taking upon
herself some of those duties which were generally Paulette’s.

“But, mamma,” said Lucie, seeing her in the dining-room, “I can set the
table.”

“So you can to-morrow,” said her mother, “but now I have done it, and
there is nothing further to add to it.”

Lucie viewed it critically. “I can gather some fresh flowers,” she
offered.

Her mother made no answer.

Lucie looked over her shoulder as she went out. “One must have courage,
mamma, so I will gather the very gayest and brightest blossoms to cheer
us up.”

She continued her way into the garden and was gravely contemplating
roses and gillyflowers when she heard some one whistling a joyous air.
For a moment she thought it was Jean, then she remembered that there
was no more a Jean to be whistling and singing about the premises. She
discovered, too, that the sound came from the other side of the wall.
It was not Annette who was there. Annette never whistled. Presently the
whistling ceased. Lucie began to arrange her bouquet, but before it
was half completed she was aware of a pair of eyes fixed upon her, and
looking up she saw above the wall a merry face smiling down at her.

“Victor!” she cried. “Where did you come from?”

“Tell me first,” returned the lad, “where is my cousin Annette.”

“That I do not know. Isn’t she in the house?”

“Would I be seeking her in the garden if she were?” laughed Victor.
“No, my dear Lucie, she is neither within nor without the mansion of
the Le Bruns so far as I can ascertain. I have brought something for
her, but since she is not here, and Madame the grandmother objects to
this gift, I must take it back or bestow it elsewhere.”

“O, Victor, what is this gift to which Madame Le Brun objects?”

“La la, I have aroused your curiosity, have I?”

“Well, you see,” Lucie began bunching the flowers she held, “you see I
am interested in a gift for Annette, who is my dearest friend.”

“My cousin Annette is to be congratulated, mademoiselle,” returned
Victor with a twinkle in his eye. “Very well, then, give me a rose and
I will show you the gift, a fine rose, mind.”

“Red or white?”

“Neither; one of those delicate pink ones like your cheeks.”

Lucie ignored the flattery, and held up a rose which Victor regarded
critically. “Too full blown,” he declared. “It will fade before
morning.”

“I will gather one from the bush, one between a rose and a bud.”

“As you yourself are.”

Lucie made a little face at him. “How you are silly, Victor. You speak
as if to a young lady.”

“Well, you will be, give you time, and I may not be here then to make
pretty speeches. I am but taking time by the forelock.”

Lucie paid no attention to the cryptic speech but gave a serious regard
to the rosebush from which she should select the proper flower, at last
deciding upon one of just the exact maturity to suit the fastidious
taste of Victor. He nodded approvingly as he took it and stuck it in
his buttonhole. “I shall wear it as an amulet,” he told her.

“Foolish boy,” replied Lucie disdainfully.

“Perhaps you think I shall need nothing to protect me from danger. I
assure you I shall. Perhaps your rose may ward off German bullets.”

“Bullets?”

“Why not? A soldier must consider bullets.”

“A soldier?”

Victor nodded. “It seems that you are not very original, mademoiselle.
You do nothing but repeat my words like a parrot.”

“But these surprises. You are too young. Surely, Victor, you are not
thinking of going to the war.”

“And why not? I shall become eighteen next month. I am but waiting that
day. I have had considerable military training. _Aux armes, citoyens!_”
He sang in a fine clear voice. “Shall I not fly to the aid of our
beloved France as well as another? I am no coward, I tell you, Lucie Du
Bois down there among your flowers.”

“Of course not. No one would believe that, but you must admit that you
are young.”

“So much the better. I decided at once that I should lose no time,
therefore I have been making ready. To-day I came to make my adieux to
my cousins and my friends here. In passing I will say that I also had
in mind the gift for my young cousin, that gift which her grandmother
will not permit her to accept. Madame Le Brun declares it shall not
have house-room nor even out-of-house-room.”

“It must be a queer sort of gift.”

“Not so queer. Wait, I will show you. Stand where you are and you shall
behold.” He scrambled down the other side of the wall while Lucie
stood expectantly. Presently above the wall appeared first a pair of
ears, then two bright eyes, then the entire head of a very alert and
inquisitive little dog, which looked around interestedly.

“O, Victor,” exclaimed Lucie, “what a darling!”

“Speak, Pom Pom,” said Victor over the wall, and a quick sharp bark
from Pom Pom replied.

Victor’s head again appeared above the vines. He took the little dog
under his arm.

“And you are going to give Annette that adorable little dog,” said
Lucie.

“I was going to give it to her, but now I am not permitted to do so.”

“Then shall you take it to camp as a mascot?”

“I thought of doing that, but I do not wish him killed nor left without
a master. You see, he belonged to my sister who died two years ago. She
charged me to see that he was always well cared for, and who can tell
what would happen to him in a camp?”

“He is certainly a darling,” repeated Lucie, standing on tiptoe that
her fingers might touch the cold nose of the little dog who licked her
fingers daintily. “See, Victor, he makes friends with me at once.”

“Would you like to have him?” asked Victor suddenly.

“O, Victor, I would, I truly would.”

“Then he is yours.”

“O, but--”

“Your mother will permit?”

“I think so. I am sure she will.”

“Yet we would better ask.”

Paying no heed to the flowers she had dropped in her effort to reach
the dog, Lucie turned to run back to her mother. “Mamma, Mamma,” she
cried as she burst into the room, “that Victor is there with a dog, so
darling a dog as you never saw, so affectionate, so intelligent, and
this dog is mine if you give me permission to keep him.”

“But why you, my daughter?” asked her mother.

“Because, you see, it is this way. It is Victor Guerin, of course you
know, Annette’s cousin who comes so often. Very well, he brings this
dog to Annette. She is not at home, has gone who knows where, and her
grandmother, who does not like dogs, refuses to allow Victor to leave
this precious little creature.”

“But why does Victor wish to give it away?”

“O, I forgot to say that it is because next month he becomes eighteen
and then he can enlist in the army.”

“That lad?”

“He is young, is he not? Still there are others as young and he is mad
to go. This dog, you see, belonged to his sister who died, and he wants
to place it where it will have good care.”

“I see. Very well, you may take it on one condition, that after the war
you will give it again to Victor if he wishes it.”

“Yes, yes, mamma, I will.”

“But what of Mousse?”

“O, Mousse!” Lucie looked uncertain. “I will ask Victor to help me to
make those two to become friends. On his part he can charge Pom Pom not
to hurt Mousse and I will make Mousse understand. He may not at once,
but he will in time. I will go now to bring Pom Pom to show you.”

She flew to the garden to see Victor astride the wall holding the
little dog.

“Mamma consents, Victor,” cried Lucie as soon as she was within
hearing, “but there is this condition: that if you want him when you
return from the war I am to give him back to you.”

“That is good,” returned Victor. “I confess, Lucie, that I am very fond
of the little creature and I shall go off with better heart for knowing
he is in good hands.” He climbed down from the wall, lifted down Pom
Pom and placed him in Lucie’s arm. “This is your new mistress. Pom
Pom,” he said, “you must be a good dog and mind her.”

Pom Pom looked questioningly from one to the other, whining a little
but accepting the situation, for he did not attempt to leave Lucie’s
arms.

“Come with me,” begged Lucie, “and help me to make peace with Mousse.
Pom Pom will not hurt him, you think?”

“Not if I tell him he must not. He is very obedient.”

Lucie looked a little troubled. “I wish I could say the same of Mousse,
still he is most intelligent and I do not believe he will mind very
much. He is really fonder of Paulette than of me, so I don’t believe he
will be very jealous.” She looked down lovingly and stroked the dog’s
soft head, Victor regarding them both soberly.

“Shall I bring your flowers?” asked Victor presently. “You have dropped
them all.”

“O, yes, please do. I forgot all about them in thinking of Pom Pom,”
responded Lucie.

He gathered up the scattered blossoms and followed her along the path
to the house.




CHAPTER III

WE GO


It was later in the day that Annette came flying in. “This dog, Lucie,”
she cried, “this dog of Victor’s, where is he? I wish much to see him.
Unlucky me not to be allowed to have him! Victor has told me, the good
Victor, how clever is this little dog, that he will stand upon his hind
legs when one bids him dance to a whistling, and that he will also sing
to an accompaniment. Is it so, or is this just nonsense? He is very
ready for a joke, this Victor.”

“Yes, he does those things,” Lucie assured her.

“The singing? It is hard to believe that.”

“If one may call it singing. It is not very melodious, though no doubt
it is the best he can do.”

“We must teach him new tricks to surprise Victor when he comes back.
I have never seen this Pom Pom, for you know he belonged to my cousin
Marguerite who lived in Bordeaux which is too far away for one to
visit, and Victor, though he has been here a number of times, has never
brought the dog with him.”

“We will go to see him if you like. Victor thought I would best tie
him for a day or two lest he try to find his way back to him, so he
is there in the garden. I will have him on a leash and let him run a
little. Come.”

Of course Annette went into raptures over the new pet, and was so
regretful at being deprived of him that Lucie consoled her by saying
she should have a share in him, although he must live with the Du
Boises rather than with Le Bruns. This arrangement quite satisfied
Annette who had felt herself defrauded of what naturally should have
come to her. So between them it certainly was not for lack of petting
and feeding that Pom Pom could feel himself abandoned, and, as a matter
of fact, in a few days he was entirely at home, ready to show off his
tricks and to attach himself devotedly to Lucie. To be sure he would
sometimes stand at the gate looking wistfully up and down the street,
regarding Lucie with questioning eyes when she came to him.

But no more did he or his mistress see Victor Guerin before bewildering
and evil days fell upon the town. First came troops marching through,
a thing of almost daily occurrence and a signal for the two little
girls to run out with flowers, fruit, or cakes of chocolate to give
to the soldiers, who would stick the flowers on the ends of their
bayonets and go off nibbling chocolate between cheers or snatches of
the Marseillaise.

It had become a thing of every day to see Grandfather Du Bois and
Grandfather Le Brun start off together to their factories, there
to remain all day. It was becoming customary, too, to behold women
doing men’s work and for the two little girls to apply themselves to
duties they had never known before. Still they were happy. No one much
believed in a protracted war. Those who shook their heads in doubt were
laughed at and called croaking ravens.

But one day came a message which compelled Madame Du Bois, pale and
shaken, to leave Lucie in charge of her grandfather and Paulette, for
the word was that Captain Du Bois was severely wounded and his wife
decided that nothing must keep her from going to him.

Lucie clung to her mother, choking back sobs and begging that she might
go, too. “Take me, mother. Please take me,” she cried, “I will be brave
and I can help, indeed I can.”

“But, dear child, it is not possible,” Madame Du Bois tried to
explain. “I do not know even if I may see him. I may not be allowed
that privilege. I shall keep as near him as I can and shall return if
he recovers,” she gave a quick sigh. “If it be that I must come back
without him you must have the courage to face the worst, and bear in
mind that it will be a hero for whom we mourn. Now, dear daughter, be
as helpful here as you can. Give as little trouble as possible. When
we keep busy there is less time for grieving. You must try to keep
grandpère and Paulette in good heart.”

These words encouraged Lucie to show a braver spirit. She no longer
wept, but stood looking very grave and thoughtful. “You will write,
mamma, very soon,” she said.

“Yes, yes, as soon as I can. As soon as it is possible I will send some
sort of message. It may be that I shall have difficulty in finding a
proper place to stay, but at the hospital I shall try to make myself so
useful that they will wish me to stay.”

So away she went, leaving Lucie waving farewells and trying to smile in
spite of tearful eyes. She remembered that she must not be a coward and
that she must keep busy so as to have no time for grieving.

“Paulette, Paulette,” she called as she reëntered the house. The old
servant had disappeared in order to hide her own emotions.

“Paulette, give me something to do, something very hard that will make
it necessary for me to keep my whole mind on it. I must have something
to do. It is so hard this parting.” She was biting her lip and giving
gasps between words.

“To be sure it is hard,” returned Paulette turning away her head. “Do I
not know, I, a mother?”

“It is not only that mamma goes, that alone would be a hard thing to
bear. She has never left me before, but papa, wounded, who knows how
badly, and if ever--if ever--” She broke down and was gathered up into
Paulette’s arms to sob out her sorrow on the good woman’s shoulder. She
had kept back the tears as long as she could; now they must overflow.

“There, there, my lamb,” Paulette patted her soothingly. “The good God
knows what is best. He does not willingly afflict. Yes, yes, weep all
you wish; it is better so. One must weep at times or go mad. To-morrow,
perhaps we shall have good news. We can be hopeful until we know. It is
best to hope.”

In a few minutes Lucie dried her eyes and tried to smile. “We must
think of grandfather, Paulette,” she said. “It is he one must first
consider. He will be coming home from the factory very soon and there
will be none but ourselves to greet him. He always went down that he
might walk home with papa, you remember, then it was mamma who was
always on hand to welcome him with a smile. I must train my mouth to
smile no matter how I feel; it was what mamma did. Somehow I must
always manage to have a smile for grandfather.”

“The poor old one,” sighed Paulette. “It is hard for him, his only son.
I know; I know. Yes, chérie, you must meet him with a courage. Compose
yourself. Go bathe the eyes, the flushed cheeks. Then we will make him
one of those omelettes he best likes, and you may go to gather the eggs
for it.”

“That is not a very difficult task but it is an interesting one,”
answered Lucie, trying to be cheerful. “I will take Pom Pom to help.
He adores to hunt for eggs. Poor Pom Pom, he has been so troubled to
see me in distress, and has been doing his best to ask me what is the
matter.”

“He is an animal most intelligent,” acknowledged Paulette. “Though for
me I prefer Mousse.”

“Ah, that is because Mousse prefers you,” declared Lucie.

“He is the older friend,” Paulette remarked as Lucie went off to her
room.

There were few traces of tears upon the little girl’s face when she
returned, and she gave Paulette a smile as she went out with Pom Pom to
hunt for eggs. “She is a marvel, that child,” murmured Paulette. “It
is not only for me who adore her to see that, but it is the same with
others, so brave, so cheerful. Hark, she sings of that Jeanne who is
cheerful all the day, like herself. Ah, my little heart, sing while you
can. There may come a day when you cannot.”

Determined not to look forward to trouble Lucie went on toward the hen
house, Pom Pom leaping and barking as he accompanied her. This was a
great game, for he could nose about in the hay and bark when he came
upon a nest. It was not always the right nest, but that did not matter;
it was just as amusing to him though it might not be to the hen who was
in possession and who would fly madly off squawking a protest.

In due time a sufficient number of eggs filled the little basket Lucie
carried. She might not participate in the preparation of the omelette,
for that must be made at exactly the right moment and be served at
once, but she could watch for her grandfather and be ready to greet him
in the manner of her mother. “Well, grandfather, how has gone the day?
Not badly, I hope. And you are not too tired. I will take your hat and
stick. The meal is almost ready, so come in and rest.”

He looked down at her keenly. She knew what he was thinking about and
opened her eyes very wide that he might see there were no tears in them.

He laid his hand gently on her head. “Dear daughter,” he murmured,
“dear daughter.”

She took his hat and stick and put them in their place, then took her
mother’s place at the table upon which Paulette was already setting
the plates of soup. Neither of the two was able to eat very heartily,
though they made a pretence of it and spoke at length of the excellence
of Paulette’s omelette, and each tried to hearten the other by making
foolish little jokes, but the meal was soon over, then although Lucie
was ready to help Paulette with the dishes she would have none of it,
but sent her off to keep her grandfather company.

It was not till almost dark that she found him sitting alone in the
twilight, his hands upon the arms of the big chair by a window of his
own room, his eyes fixed upon the eastern sky which reflected the
afterglow in soft tints of rose and purple. Lucie seated herself upon
his knee and his arms folded around her. Neither spoke but there was
silent comfort in this nearness. At last the old man put the child
gently from him. “I must see Antoine Le Brun,” he said. “Let us keep a
great hope in our hearts, my child. To-morrow we may hear. God grant it
to be good news.”

So he left her and Lucie went down to the kitchen to find Paulette
telling her beads, with Mousse drowsing on the window sill beside her
and Pom Pom curled up in a heap at her feet.

The next day came a hurried note from Madame Du Bois. She was making
but slow progress owing to the hard conditions everywhere, but she was
with friends, and she hoped to be able to continue her journey. They
must not be alarmed if they did not hear at once. She would write as
soon as opportunity afforded, and with this they were obliged to be
satisfied.

A day or two of quiet when Lucie tried to get used to the loneliness
and made a great effort to cheer up her grandfather. Between whiles
there was Annette, to be sure, and there was also Pom Pom who was a
ready pupil when the two girls attempted to teach him to bark when they
cried: “_Vive la France!_” and to hold a small flag in his mouth waving
it when they sang the Marseillaise. As for Mousse, he had reached the
point of tolerating the newcomer, but not an inch further would he go.
A proud disdain was the limit of what he felt he was called upon to
express.

“It is as much as we can expect of him,” declared Lucie: “Cats are
always more reserved than dogs, mamma says.”

Annette laughed. “How you are a funny one,” she said. “I could never
analyze an animal in that way.”

“O, do not flatter me by imagining it was my thought,” replied Lucie.
“It was mamma who said it. I think, Annette, that we must try to make a
true _poilu_ of Pom Pom. Perhaps in time we can persuade him to wear a
sword and cap.”

“But who will make them for him?”

“Victor, perhaps, can make the sword and we can make the cap. That
poor Victor will not have a very happy time in the trenches, I fear.
Grandfather says the modern fighting is most bewildering.”

“So says my grandfather. How those two talk and argue and fight their
old battles over.”

“Yes, when they are not talking about the factories. Over the top, Pom
Pom,” cried Lucie as she vainly tried to make the little dog jump over
a stick she held.

“He has no ambition to be a _poilu_,” declared Annette.

“But he must be, or we shall conscript him,” replied Lucie, at which
speech of course Annette laughed.

“Do you think it possible that the Germans will come to this place?”
asked Lucie after a silence during which Pom Pom was allowed his
freedom.

“I do not know,” returned Annette, “but I am afraid sometimes.”

“And I, too, when I go to bed with no papa, no mamma in the house and
wake up in the night feeling so alone.”

“I, too, have neither father nor mother.”

“But you have a grandmother which I have not.”

“Ah, but you have, over there in the United States.”

“Much good that does when there is an ocean between us.”

Their talk was interrupted by the sudden appearance of Lucie’s
grandfather with a stern and set expression upon his face. At the same
moment came an imperative call for Annette who scrambled over the wall
hastily. “We go,” announced Mons. Du Bois, “at once.” “O, grandfather
is it--is it papa?” quavered Lucie.

“No. The Germans are coming,” he replied curtly. “Go to your mother’s
room; gather together such valuables as you know she may wish to
secure, with any of your own, put them in a strong box and bring the
box to me at once. There is no time to lose.”

Without waiting for further orders Lucie flew to her mother’s room,
hurriedly gathered together pieces of jewelry, a couple of miniatures,
a packet of letters, a few laces. To these she added her own little
trinkets, crowding them all into a box which she brought down from
the attic and which, when filled, she carried to her grandfather. She
found him with Paulette in the garden. Both had spades with which
they were digging up the earth as rapidly as possible. A large box of
silver stood at one side, another of papers. Lucie set down the box she
carried. Her grandfather glanced up but continued his spading as he
gave further directions.

“Go now, and make a bundle of your clothing, no more than you can carry
easily. Take only serviceable things, nothing flimsy.”

Back went Lucie, wasted no time in collecting shoes, stockings, a pair
of each, a change of underwear, a couple of her stoutest frocks. She
gazed for a moment wistfully at the daintier, prettier things, ribbons,
sashes, the light summer hat, but forbore to put in anything more than
she had been told to do. She then put on her newest frock and with
the bundle under her arm went on downstairs, pausing to give but one
farewell look at her room.

Her grandfather and Paulette were throwing on the last spadefuls of
earth to cover up the spot where they had buried the valuables. Then
they tramped it down. Paulette craftily heaped dead branches, stripped
vines and odds and ends upon the place to make it look like a mere dump
heap.

Lucie followed her grandfather to the house. As they passed through
the kitchen she saw baskets filled with provisions. In the hall were
satchels and bags. She watched her grandfather take a bunch of keys
from his pocket, open a drawer in her father’s desk, and take therefrom
a bundle of papers which he stowed away inside his coat.

Presently Paulette came in laden with baskets and bundles.

“You have too much there, Paulette,” said Mons. Du Bois.

“Better throw them or give them away than leave them for the
_boches_,” she responded grimly.

“The chickens, Ninette the goat, Mousse, we cannot leave them,” cried
Lucie in distress.

“We must,” declared Paulette doggedly. “Mousse will be able to fend for
himself; he is a good mouser. The chickens,” she made a little dubious
sound. “Le bon Dieu knows what will become of them.”

“All our pretty hens, the beautiful big cocks, and poor Ninette. Is it
not possible that we can take them to some safe place?”

“Where?” asked Paulette sarcastically.

“I don’t know. O, I don’t know, but it seems so very dreadful.”

“They will not be here long,” replied Paulette gruesomely with a lift
of her eyebrows.

Lucie did not dare continue the subject with all the possibilities it
suggested, but she did say, “Pom Pom will go. He must. Nothing, no one,
shall persuade me to leave him behind.”

Her grandfather looked down doubtfully at the little dog crouched
at Lucie’s feet and gazing from one to the other with wistfully
questioning eyes.

“He can walk, you know,” Lucie went on beseechingly. “He will be no
trouble at all. I shall not need to carry him.”

“But to feed him.”

“He shall have a share of my food.”

“It is a long way, dear child, and we may want for food ourselves.”

“Where is it that we go?”

“To Paris if we can get there. It seems the best place, for there we
shall find friends and work to do.”

“And we walk all that distance?”

“Part of the way at least. The trains are not running to this town, for
many of the stations and much of the railroad is destroyed. Everything
is in confusion.”

Lucie looked from the window to see coming down the street a procession
of men, women, children, all sorts of vehicles, each laden with what
could be carried.

“The first consideration is to get away from here as quickly as
possible,” her grandfather went on. “Later we may be fortunate enough
to find some better means of travel than on foot, but now it is the
only means. Come.” He slung a strap over his shoulder, grasped his
stick and started toward the door. To the strap was secured a valise,
and he bore another in his hand. He did not cast one look behind, but
went on to the gate, Lucie following with Pom Pom at her heels. In the
rear came Paulette burdened with baskets, packages, bundles done up in
handkerchiefs. Over her head and shoulders she wore the little black
crocheted shawl which she was seldom without. She had on stout shoes,
a blue stuff skirt, a jacket and an apron with capacious pockets. From
her waist dangled a pair of headless fowls which she had not taken
time to dress. From her neck, hanging by a stout cord, was appended a
bottle of wine. One basket she carried on her head. From it protruded a
long loaf of bread.

“I will close the door, Paulette,” said Lucie, turning back.

Paulette was too weighed down by her impedimenta to give her accustomed
shrug, though she said. “What matter? Those boches will enter anyhow.”

Lucie felt a sudden sensation as of a clutch at her throat at this
remark and as she saw Mousse placidly washing his face where he sat on
the wall in the sunshine. “Adieu, adieu, my dear Mousse, dear home,
dear garden,” she whispered.

A little whimper from Pom Pom was followed almost immediately by an
ominous roar of guns. The enemy was coming nearer. At the crash of a
bomb exploding in a just deserted street the long line of refugees
hastened their steps.

Just ahead Lucie saw Annette with her grandfather who was helping along
the feeble steps of his wife toward a ramshackle carriage which stood
waiting for them. Everything in the way of a vehicle had been pressed
into service. A woman was pushing a perambulator whose occupant,
a little six months old baby, was almost hidden by the goods and
chattels packed about him. Mothers hurried the tripping steps of their
children. Old men hobbled haltingly. One decrepit old soul trundled in
a wheelbarrow her more decrepit old husband. Pigs, cows, sheep, geese,
turkeys had part in the procession. Little children hugged pet chickens
or rabbits. Some had birds in cages; others clung fast to a favorite
doll or a wooden horse.

The roar of the guns sounded more and more threatening. Fires flared
up. There was the noise of crashing walls as the company moved on,
on, down the road toward safety, leaving home and all its beloved
associations behind them.




CHAPTER IV

A LONELY NIGHT


Footsore, weary, hour after hour Lucie dragged herself along. The
little bundle, which at first seemed not too great a weight, at last
became intolerably heavy. One by one Paulette disposed of her bundles.
Mons. Du Bois staggered under the valises, but refused to give them up.
Poor little Pom Pom faithfully followed his mistress. At times he would
lie down quite exhausted but always he caught up with his friends.

At last came along a cart drawn by two stout horses whose driver hailed
them. “Ah, Mons. Du Bois, this is a sad journey for you,” he said. “I
can perhaps give you a lift.”

Mons. Du Bois hesitated. “You are very kind, my friend,” he said at
last. “It is not I who need the lift, but if you could take these
valises a short distance it would ease my old back. In my soldiering
days I could carry a much heavier weight. I tried in vain to hire some
sort of conveyance, but everything was spoken for. My youthful strength
has forsaken me, I fear.”

“I can make room for you,” insisted the man.

“Not for me, but for my granddaughter, perhaps.”

“Then mademoiselle?” The man turned to Lucie.

She shook her head. “No, no, I am young and strong. I prefer it should
be my grandfather. We can travel along slowly, grandpère, and meet you
farther on, by nightfall.”

“We shall not be traveling very fast with our load,” said the driver,
“and we shall not more than make the next village where is the station.
It was still untouched from last reports and I hope one can travel by
rail the rest of the way. Come, monsieur, better mount the cart.”

Mons. Du Bois argued still further, but at last consented to accept the
man’s kind offer. The old man was very weary and that wound which he
had received in his soldiering days still gave him discomfort.

“We can relieve you a little of your load, too, my good woman,” the man
told Paulette. “Let us have one of those heavy baskets.” Nothing loath
Paulette handed up a basket, and the wagon moved on, the two sturdy
horses quite equal to the added weight.

The Le Bruns, whom at first they had outdistanced, passed them some
time before, Mons. Le Brun having been able to persuade the man with
the ramshackle carriage, for a goodly sum, to take them in, although
it seemed as if any moment the carriage might break down or the horse
give out, so many were the passengers. Annette had waved her hand as
they drove past.

“Are you going to Paris?” asked Lucie.

“No,” Annette called back. “We are going to my grandmother’s sister.
She will be glad to take us in.”

It was something to know where Annette was going, Lucie thought,
although she would turn aside a little later on, and her destination
was nowhere near Paris. It must be to Victor’s home they were going. It
was a pity that Pom Pom could not have gone with them, Lucie reflected.

She continued to plod stolidly along with Paulette. They spoke little.
It took all their energies to keep up the steady pace. Finally Lucie
found herself saying over dully: “At the next village we shall meet
grandfather and take the train.” Evidently the same thought was in
Paulette’s mind, for she turned after a while to say: “It cannot be
much farther, little one. By sundown we should arrive.”

“Where do we sleep, Paulette?”

“Who knows? There must be some spot. No doubt Monsieur will arrange for
that before we come. There is no question but we shall sleep well.”

This was comforting and spurred Lucie’s lagging tread to a brisker one.
Pom Pom toiled patiently along behind her. Once in a while he stopped
short, looked back, then took up his line of march, his eyes fixed
steadfastly upon the track of his mistress.

At last as the sun was setting they heard a shout ahead, then a
confused murmur of voices raised high in a clamor of discontent.

“What can it be, Paulette?” cried Lucie, stopping short.

“We shall see,” Paulette answered laconically.

They went on a little farther, reaching a slight rise in the road.
Paulette stood still, shaded her eyes and looked toward the village
of their destination. “Mon Dieu!” she exclaimed, “there is no more a
station,” for beyond them were shattered walls, torn tracks, smoking
ruins.

Lucie sank down on the ground and burst into tears from sheer fatigue
and disappointment. Pom Pom crept close to her, licking her hands and
whining his sympathy. “What shall we do? What shall we do?” moaned the
girl. “I am so tired, Paulette, oh, so tired. I do not see how I can
walk another step.”

“I know, my child, I know. Let me think for a moment.” The brave woman
looked keenly around. Not far away was a cow shed which had escaped
destruction. “I cannot leave you here by the roadside,” mused Paulette.
“Let us go to the little shed, my dear one. I can leave you there while
I go to hunt up Monsieur. It is evident that there is no inn left in
that village, but one never knows what may be found till he seeks.
Come, we will examine that cow shed.”

They left the road, turned into a field, red with poppies, and reached
the modest shelter to find it, if not very clean, at least empty.
Some bits of rope hanging from a nail, and a pile of straw gave sole
evidence of any former presence, if one does not include the barnyard
odor.

“It is not a palace,” declared Paulette, “but it is a shelter and out
of the way. I think the owners have fled, so one may rest assured that
it will not be invaded. Rest here, child, but do not permit yourself to
be seen. I will leave the baskets and bundles so as to be the quicker
in returning. The little dog will be a protection.”

“From what?” asked Lucie in alarm.

“From nothing,” returned Paulette with a wry smile. “From frogs in the
pond, crickets in the grass maybe.”

Thus reassured Lucie took a seat on the pile of straw just inside the
door while Paulette deposited the baskets near by, Pom Pom looking
interestedly on.

As Paulette started off with many assurances of a speedy return.
Pom Pom looked questioningly after her. Was he to go, too? His eyes
inquired of Lucie.

“No, no, Pom, you are to stay with me,” she told him, and with a sigh
of content the tired little creature dropped down on the straw, and,
with head on paws, went off to sleep.

It was very quiet. For a while one could not realize that so lately war
had been so close at hand, that shrieking bombs had flown overhead,
that screaming of shells, booming of guns, whir of airplanes had
disturbed this peace, and had wrought destruction in passing this
little corner of the world.

The sun went down leaving clouds of flaming red which turned to pallid
gray. Frogs croaked. Crickets chirped. Once or twice there was a
distant roar of guns. Lucie wondered sorrowfully if it came from her
town or some other. She began to feel very hungry, but concluded to
wait for Paulette who should return at any moment. It grew darker and
darker, but no Paulette.

“If I wait till it grows any darker,” decided Lucie, “I shall not be
able to find the food.” She moved over to the basket, remembering that
Paulette had supplied, for their noonday meal, bread, butter, cheese,
roasted chicken. As Pom Pom heard her at the basket he pricked up his
ears, then arose with a yawn and wagged his tail.

“You are hungry, too, poor Pom Pom,” said Lucie lifting the lid of the
basket. “Ciel!” she exclaimed as she peered down into the contents of
the basket, “it is not food at all which we have here. The basket
which held that must have gone with grandfather in the wagon. What a
misfortune! No doubt Paulette thought she handed up the one which holds
the utensils. She was flurried and the two are exactly alike. I wish
she would return so we could join those others and get the food. I have
half a mind to go on. To be sure I could carry never these things, but
perhaps they would be safe here and some one could return for them.”

It was a comfort to have the little dog to talk to, Lucie considered
as she kept up a murmuring conversation. “It is very strange that she
does not come, Pom Pom,” she said. “Surely it is not so far. One can
see several lights quite plainly. Hark! there is another of those sharp
reports; it is the third. They sound much nearer than those other
rumbling growls. Figure to yourself, my Pom Pom, what it must be to
live in the midst of the cannonading as my poor papa did. I wonder, oh,
I wonder when I shall see him, my mother also. What would they say to
behold my plight? Grandfather, of course, will let them know when we
reach Paris. It seems very far away, that city of Paris. Why does not
Paulette come, Pom Pom? It grows so very dark, she will not be able to
find her way. If one had a lantern or a bit of candle, though perhaps
it is better not, for as it is we are quite hidden as Paulette charged
me to be.”

Pom Pom from time to time wagged his tail in response to the talk, but
he had prowled around and had discovered a discarded bone which gave
him some satisfaction and to which he gave his best attention, bare as
it was. At last when Lucie had lapsed into a silence, and the darkness
had settled down upon them, he drew very close and lay down with his
head in the lap of his mistress, once in a while giving her hand a
reassuring lick.

As the moments passed Lucie grew more and more concerned. She was of
two minds about staying. Suppose she started off in the dark, she might
lose her way and miss Paulette altogether. Paulette would be distracted
at not finding her. Suppose she stayed. It was an appalling prospect to
remain in that dreary place by herself. She who had never spent a night
away from the safety of her own roof, to be utterly alone in a place
whose very name was unknown to her, could not tell what terrors might
befall her. She resolved that she would keep watch all night. Paulette
might arrive at any moment. She propped herself up against a corner of
the shed as best she could, her bundle behind her, Pom Pom at her feet.
The stars were coming out. The frogs piped up again, then the crickets.
Presently another sudden sound of explosion. “Paulette, Paulette, why
don’t you come? It is so lonely here, so--dark--so dark.” Pom Pom
stirred. Lucie put out her hand wanderingly to rest it on his head as
he moved closer up by her side. Her head dropped till it rested on her
bundle, then she was not conscious of anything more. Little maid and
little dog slept the night through. Once only Pom Pom stirred, pricked
up his ears, sat up and listened, then snuggled back with a sigh and
went off again into a sound sleep.

[Illustration: Victor spread the doubled paper upon the spot. Lucie put
out her little slim foot, stepped lightly and was over.]

It was early, early in the morning when Lucie was aroused by a sudden
squawk, a wild flutter of wings. She sat up and rubbed her eyes to
behold a much ruffled hen disappearing out of the doorway and cackling
her best. Dazed with sleep Lucie thought at first she must be dreaming,
but the cackling fully aroused her. She looked around, bewildered.
“Where in the world am I?” she exclaimed. Then the events of the day
before came back to her. She stood up, shaking the straw from her
dress. “Of all things!” she exclaimed, “I have spent the entire night
in this dirty place, and have slept like a Christian. Who could believe
it? Thank heaven there is no door, so one could at least have fresh
air. Where is Paulette, and where indeed is Pom Pom?”

She went out into the field to look around. Dew lay on the grass.
The poppy buds were unfolding. A lark sang soaring overhead. The
hen, having concluded her triumphant remarks, was on the search for
breakfast and was picking around quite as if all her friends and
neighbors had not been carried off.

“It is most strange what has become of that Paulette,” murmured Lucie,
looking more and more troubled. “Since she has not returned to me it is
plain that I must go in search of her. As for Pom Pom, he will not have
strayed far. I have no doubt but he will come back to me. Now that it
is daylight and I am rested it should not be difficult to get to the
station if I had but something to eat before I go. What a thing to have
done to sleep all night when I meant to keep watch. Well, as one may
say: _Avise la fin_: consider the end. I am refreshed, though I would
be more so if I had had a mouthful of supper and could look forward to
a bite of breakfast. I should probably be exhausted but for the sleep.
As for Pom Pom, no doubt he has gone off to forage for himself. What a
thing to have the nose of a dog so that one can pry into corners and so
discover food. If they had left the cow behind there would be the milk,
though if the cow had remained she might have objected to sharing her
bed with me. I am very sure I should be one to feel the same objection.
However, we dispose of that since there is no cow. Neither is there
anything to eat that I can discover. One cannot feed on poppies nor on
grass. I wish Pom Pom would come. I should not then feel so deserted
and I must try to walk to that village. I may faint before I get there;
I feel so empty, but I must make the effort. Anything is better than
staying here to starve. What would my parents say if they knew I am
without a breakfast altogether?”

She sat down forlornly in the doorway, continuing her soliloquy. “If
one but had a piece of chocolate to nibble. If I had but saved that
which I had in my bag when I started, but, improvident that I am! it
was all gone before night. Well, there is nothing to do but make myself
take to the road, although of a truth I must confess I do not like to
undertake a journey on an empty stomach.”

She sat puzzling over the situation, when her eyes fell on the little
hen pecking industriously around. She jumped to her feet exclaiming:
“Of course! Where there is a cackle there must be an egg. I will hunt
for it.”

She returned to the interior of the shed, hunting among the straw, but
nothing came of this. There was a small shelf high up in one corner,
Lucie stood on tiptoe to look at it. There were some wisps of straw
upon it which well might serve for a nest. She felt sure that it was
from this place the hen had flown. She tried to touch the spot but was
unable to reach so far.

“There is no use in trying to pull down the hay,” she said to herself,
“for of what use would a broken egg be, unless Pom Pom should choose
to lap it up? If I could only find something to stand on I might reach
it.” She tried to clamber up by means of the crannies in the wall, but
the shelf was a corner one and in such position that she could get at
it no better and was obliged to give up this attempt. Next she went
outside and began to look around for a box, a stone, anything which she
could stand upon and so come within reach of the coveted prize. At last
she managed to get hold of a stone which she laboriously rolled to the
spot. She stepped upon it, and began feeling around, but her hand found
nothing but the hay; if eggs there were they were still out of reach.

This latest disappointment was too much for her. Utterly tired out,
faint and distressed, she sat down and began to weep forlornly. These
extra efforts had taken all her reserve strength and she felt sick and
weak.

Meanwhile down the road was trotting Pom Pom who had been on a voyage
of discovery. If breakfast would not come to him he must go find the
breakfast, was his way of settling matters. So he had started forth
as soon as he realized that Lucie was awake and in no present need of
his defense. First he scared up a flock of birds but these offered no
special inducement, for he was not out for a frolic. Next he scratched
madly away at a stone under which a field mouse had hidden, but the
mouse was too wary for him, and he gave up this sport. Pretty soon he
came to a little pool of water where he refreshed himself and felt
better. Once in a while he stopped to look back at the cow shed to make
sure that his mistress had not left it. He stood undecided at a turn of
the road. If he went farther he would lose sight of the cow shed; if
he retraced his steps he was still breakfastless, and it would prove a
bootless adventure. He decided to go on. His nose was to be depended
upon quite as much as his eyes and his mistress could not get away
without his ability to track her. Victor was quite right when he called
him a wise little dog, for in course of time he proved himself worthy
the praise.

It was not very long before he came upon something which gave him
complete satisfaction, and after an intimate interview with the object,
he began dragging it back along the road over which he had come. Once
in a while he lay down and employed himself in gnawing at one end of
the burden, thus balancing the weight by disposing of some on the
inside, some on the out.

In course of time Lucie lifted her teary eyes and looked off in the
direction of the road over which Pom Pom was traveling. She saw a small
animal trotting along, stopping now and then to get a better grasp of
the thing he carried.

“Pom Pom! It is Pom!” cried Lucie starting to her feet. “He is
bringing something. I wonder what in the world he has found.” She gave
the whistle which always brought him. He tossed up his head, gave a
quick bark and seemed inclined to relinquish the prize he had brought
thus far. He stood over it for a moment, then concluded he would not
abandon it, for he took a fresh hold and came on.

Lucie ran forward to meet him. He saw her coming and stopped to stand
guard over his capture, wagging his tail violently when she called to
him. “He seems very proud of himself,” said Lucie. “I must find out
why. Pom Pom, what is it you have there?” she asked.

Pom Pom danced forward barking joyously, then ran back to his booty.

Lucie stooped down to examine what lay upon the ground. “Bread!” she
exclaimed. “What a dog!” for before her was what remained of a long
loaf of bread; evidently it had fallen from the basket of some refugee,
possibly from that very missing basket. There remained only about half
the original loaf. The two ends had been gnawed off and it was no
better for having been dragged through the dusty road. But bread it
was, and at sight of it tears again rose to Lucie’s eyes. “You dear
dog! You darling Pom,” she murmured, caressing him. “What have you done
for me, and they would have had me leave you behind! Ah, my Pom, no
power can now separate us. The bread is not very clean, to be sure,
but how much better than nothing. You shall have the outside while I
will take the rest. There are knives in that basket, I know, for I
discovered them when I was hoping to find food. If one could but get at
that nest, one would not fare so badly in spite of the egg being raw.
Come, Pom Pom!” and Pom Pom came.

She sat down with renewed courage, pared off the crusts and gave them
to Pom Pom, who, after all, was not so hungry as he had been. It was
rather a stuffy meal, but every crumb of it was devoured when Lucie at
last was ready to start out. She carried only her own bundle. The rest
of the luggage she must leave, likewise the unattainable egg, which
remained to lure back the little hen to her nest. The hen, indeed, was
the sole living creature to whom Lucie could make her adieux. One may
never know the fate of that particular hen nor her eggs, though it is
to be hoped they did their part in the preservation of life in that
devastated region.




CHAPTER V

WELL MET


It was with many misgivings that Lucie started out upon her walk to
the village. Pom Pom, however, had nothing upon his mind after having
settled the food question for the moment. All that was required of
him was to keep his mistress in sight, but Lucie had far more anxious
thoughts as she went on. She was now sure that something had happened
to Paulette whose devotion to the family would permit nothing short of
utter disability from keeping her overnight. As for her grandfather,
Lucie felt that here too was another cause for worry. What had become
of him? Was she to be left utterly alone? she who had always lived such
a peaceful, protected life? With Paulette and her grandfather vanished
mysteriously, how could she reach Paris? and even supposing she were
able to do this, what would she do when she got there? She must make
every effort to find her mother and father. How would she best set
about doing this? She felt herself such a tiny speck in such a big
world. Finally her lips took to forming only the words: “Brave, I must
be brave,” as she trudged on. The distance was greater than she had
believed, and with no more nourishment than part of a loaf of bread she
did not feel herself any too well fortified for so long a walk.

She had reached the outskirts of the town without seeing any one.
Except for the distant roar of guns, the occasional crash of a
collapsing wall, the far-off whir of an airplane, there were no
disturbing sounds.

Presently a figure at last appeared coming toward her, a man in the
red and blue uniform of a _poilu_. Pom Pom, who had been following
laggingly with lolling tongue, suddenly pricked up his ears and dashed
forward barking joyously.

The soldier stopped to pat the little dog who frantically jumped upon
him, licking his hands and whimpering with delight. “But where did you
come from, my Pom Pom? Are you then lost?” Lucie heard the man say as
she came nearer.

She stood still, not recognizing the figure in military dress, then she
herself ran forward almost as joyously as Pom Pom had done. “Victor!
Victor!” she cried. “What good fortune is this. What a happiness to
meet you!”

“A happiness, is it?” He laughed and showed his strong white teeth.
“And what are you doing here, you and Pom Pom, so far from home?
This is a strange meeting indeed. Where are the rest, your mother,
grandfather and all?”

“Ah, that is what I do not know. I am in great distress, Victor.”

“Is it so? Then tell me what is wrong.” His face went grave as he took
her bundle from her and looked into the weary little face whose eyes
were so mournful with dark shadows under them. “Poor little one, you do
look as if you had traveled far,” he said pityingly. “Come, sit down
here by the roadside and tell me all about it.”

So Lucie poured forth her sad little tale, concluding with: “And but
for Pom Pom I might have starved.”

Victor’s hand fondled the little dog who lay contentedly at his feet.
“But my aunt and uncle, my cousin Annette, where are they?” he asked.

“They turned aside and I hope are quite safe with your own grandparents
in your town, Victor.”

“Good! That is very good. I am glad to know this, so then, if we do not
discover this Paulette nor your grandfather, I can take you there where
you will be not only safe but will be very welcome.”

“That is a great relief, Victor,” Lucie gave a sigh. “But first this
Paulette must be found. What do you think could have happened to her,
and to my grandfather?”

“One cannot tell. I hope nothing very serious. There were explosions,
you know, after the station was bombed. There are still walls falling
in the town.”

“And they were there? Oh, Victor, do you think it possible that they
are killed?”

“Let us hope not.”

“But something very serious must have happened or they would not have
left me all night alone. Oh, what sorrows, what sorrows! My father
wounded, my grandfather and dear old Paulette perhaps no more.”

Victor patted her hand. “Do not cross that bridge yet, little one.
I shall not leave you till I see you are perfectly safe. I have
thirty-six hours’ leave before reporting to my captain. It is to-day
that I wear my uniform for the first time,” he added proudly.

“And very becoming it is,” said Lucie trying to smile in spite of her
fears. “Such a great fortune it is, Victor, to meet some one I know.”

“Of course. That goes without the saying. _Allons_, then, Forward!
March!” He did not say that his leave was to have been spent with
his family, and that in returning to the village he had just left he
probably would have to give up his trip to the earlier destination,
because of lack of time.

As they neared the little town Lucie saw wisps of smoke rising from
heaps of ruins. Such walls as were standing showed gaping holes where
windows had been. Scarce a house stood intact. The little church
was riddled, only from a niche a sorrowful Madonna looked down upon
the piles of shattered stones which lay upon the pavement where her
worshipers had knelt.

Lucie clutched Victor’s arm. “Do you suppose they have done the same to
our village, to our house?” she asked.

He shrugged his shoulders, unable to reassure her. As they entered the
forsaken streets they came upon a few stragglers poking among the ruins
with the hope of discovering some of their lost treasures. In what
remained of the church, cots had been set up for the wounded, and here
doctors and Red Cross nurses were busy.

As they stopped in front of this place a voice shrilled out: “But I
tell you, monsieur, I am neither ill nor insane. It is as I say and I
must be gone at once. You must not detain me.”

Lucie gave a start. “Listen!” she cried.

“I appeal to you, madame,” the voice went on. “Figure to yourself a
daughter of yours, alone, stricken with terror, not knowing where to
go, feeling herself utterly deserted. It is of all things impossible
that I should be detained. Bah, what is a cut on the head? A nothing.
Yes, to be sure I was insensible, but at this moment I have my
faculties, and I am so weak that I cannot make that little journey.
You will send? But the child in that foul cow shed all night! Who knows
if she be not ill or has left the place and is wandering about lost and
forsaken?”

“Paulette!” cried Lucie darting up the steps of the battered church,
from which came the voice. “Paulette, are you then here? It is I,
Lucie.”

From the doorway, which was scarce more than a gaping hole rushed forth
a stout figure with bandaged head and torn clothing. “My little one!
The blessed child! It is she herself,” cried Paulette grasping Lucie
by the hands and drawing her inside. “Monsieur the doctor, Madame the
nurse, behold the child. She is here. Is it not a miracle of _le bon
Dieu_?” Paulette, excited, half laughing, half crying, held tightly to
Lucie.

The doctor and nurse stood by smiling appreciatively. “Tell us how you
managed to get here safely, mademoiselle,” said the doctor.

So Lucie told her tale which was interrupted by many exclamations from
Paulette, but was listened to with interest by all who heard.

“Surely the saints had you in keeping,” said Paulette, when the story
was ended. “For there is danger everywhere and in coming here you might
have been killed as I nearly was.”

“Tell me of that,” urged Lucie. “Were you badly hurt, Paulette? Are you
suffering, my poor one?”

“Not now so much. It was this way that it happened, _ma petite_: I was
coming into the town. I had arrived as you may say. Suddenly a great
noise, a crash. I knew no more till I find myself within these walls,
if walls one can still call them. I am at first unable to collect my
thoughts. At last I realize that here am I with a hole in the head and
so weak that when I stand I am afflicted with a dizziness. I wish to
go to you, but no, this is impossible. I try to explain. This, too, is
difficult. It is then the middle of the night, I know not what hour. I
lie down again and sleep, perhaps. When I awake I am given food. I am
better, and then I begin to implore that I be allowed to return to you.
These, though good and kind, refuse to permit me to go. Tell me, little
one, how did you fare in that so unclean place? You, of course had food
from the basket.”

“But no, Paulette, for alas, it was the wrong basket. The one in which
was the food, that went with grandfather.”

“_Mon Dieu!_” exclaimed Paulette. “How I am a stupid? What a _sot
animal_, a _dindon_ I am not to have perceived that, and then I had
not this wound upon the head which would have given me some excuse for
stupidity.”

“But you realize, Paulette, that those two baskets were exactly alike.”

“That matters nothing, for the fact remains that you were without food.
Monsieur, Madame, she starves, this child. She has eaten nothing since
noon yesterday.”

“Oh yes, but I have,” Lucie hastened to assure her. “You will scarce
believe what I have to tell you, and will say it is nothing short of a
miracle indeed.” And she proceeded to tell of Pom Pom’s achievement to
a still more interested audience.

“This dog, this very clever creature, where is he?” asked the doctor
when she had ended her recital.

“He is here,” Lucie told him waving her hand to where, on outside, Pom
Pom was quite content to wait with Victor.

“We must see this so clever animal,” declared the doctor, going to the
foot of the steps where Victor was sitting.

“And my grandfather?” said Lucie turning again to Paulette. “He is
safe? He is here?”

“He is safe, let us hope. None were allowed to remain when the
authorities evacuated the town. All were forced to leave. To be sure,
I hear there were some who hid themselves and would not go. This
Paulette, that you see, she stayed because perforce she must. It is
perhaps a Providence which sent that blow upon the head or out I must
have gone whether I would or not, and then what would have become of
you?”

“There was Victor,” said Lucie thoughtfully.

“Oh, yes, Victor. La la, there was Victor,” exclaimed Paulette marching
off. Lucie could not tell whether offended or not.

But presently she returned with the nurse whom Lucie had first seen
and who brought a bowl of soup which Lucie received gratefully, and
which she felt inclined to eat to the very last drop for it was hot and
comforting. But she left a few spoonfuls saying to the nurse, “I may
give this to Pom Pom?”

“Eat it all, my dear,” replied the nurse smiling. “We can find
something else for a little dog who is so faithful.”

Pom Pom provided for, the next thing was to consult Victor about
various matters. There were the things left in the cow shed which
Paulette declared she could not live without. How were they to recover
these? and where would they be liable to find Mons. Du Bois? Lucie put
these questions anxiously.

Victor thus appealed to felt himself more than ever thrust into the
rôle of protector and gave up then and there his last hope of getting
home on this furlough. He could not desert Lucie. It would never do
to start her out upon a journey with Paulette who was in no condition
to travel on foot, and there did not appear any one to whose care he
might intrust a young girl and a wounded woman. He pondered over the
situation, Lucie watching him anxiously.

“Listen,” he said at last, smiling down at the troubled girl, his kind
brown eyes alight with sympathy, “I think we can work our way out of
this difficulty. Trust it all to me. At present you are quite safe
here. I will go back for those things, if needs be, but first I will
inquire about this lost grandfather who, no doubt, is as concerned
about you as you about him. I will see if I can discover something of
him. Let us see, he was traveling in a wagon with one you know. Is this
right?”

“Yes, he was with Gustave Foucher, a tradesman in our town and whom we
all know well as a kind, good man. Gustave has his family with him, and
some household goods, yet he was willing to take grandfather, too. The
wagon is drawn by two stout black horses.”

“Good, we will then see what we can learn of this Gustave Foucher, and
then I will report to you, then it will be time enough to attend to
those baskets in the cow shed.”

“Oh, Victor, how good you are,” cried Lucie, gratefully.

“La la, who is good? Not any one really. I do this because it amuses,
it entertains; it is out of the day’s routine, an adventure, as
one might say. Pom Pom had better stay with you while I pursue my
investigations.”

He went off to follow up his course of action, leaving Lucie to reënter
the church where Paulette was busying herself in waiting on those more
helpless than herself. It was a gruesome place, Lucie thought, with its
row of cots in which lay groaning sufferers, some too severely hurt to
hope for recovery, and some who would never again be whole. This was
war, her first intimate acquaintance with its horrors. In such a place
perhaps her father lay at this moment. She prayed that he might be
spared and that her mother was at his side, as she knelt for a moment
before an untouched altar. When she arose to her feet she saw Paulette
trying to make more comfortable a patient close by.

“Can’t I help, too?” whispered Lucie.

Paulette shook her head, but one of the nurses beckoned to her and she
followed her to the sacristy where a sort of kitchen was established.
“I wouldn’t stay in there,” said the nurse. “Perhaps you can help here.
You can, maybe, wash dishes.”

“Oh, I can do that,” Lucie assured her and diligently set to work,
feeling thankful that something useful was her part to perform.

She was not long at her occupation, however, for before she had quite
finished the pile before her, Victor came back.

“Your friend, the young man, has returned,” some one came to tell her.

Lucie looked inquiringly at the young woman who was in charge. She
nodded encouragingly. “Go, my dear. You have been very helpful,” said
the woman.

She gave up the towel she had been using and went softly out, tiptoeing
past the row of cots. Victor was waiting on the steps. “What news?”
inquired Lucie.

“All’s well,” he answered. “That grandfather has been through here.
He left word with the man who has been station master but who no more
is so because there is no station. With this person he has left word
that he is not allowed to stop and is going on to the next point where
one can get a train, and there you are to meet him. If by any chance
you miss him, you and Paulette are to proceed direct to Paris and
communicate with him at the house of one Jacques Moulin.”

“Oh yes, I know this Jacques person. He came often to buy goods at the
factory and would sometimes come to dine with us.”

“He is a young man?” asked Victor.

“No, quite an old one, not so old perhaps as grandfather but enough
old, for he has grown-up children.”

“That is well,” said Victor with satisfaction. “So then we consider the
next thing.”

“I suppose that is _Marchons_ again.”

“Yes, but not on foot. _That_ will not do. I shall have the honor of
being your coachman.”

“What do you mean? There can be no coaches left here.”

“You may not be overweeningly proud of your equipage, but it is better
than none. At the present moment it lacks a wheel, but that is a simple
matter to adjust, and good fortune for us, for because of this mishap
to the ancient vehicle, it has been discarded, left behind, so to
speak.”

“But how can one travel with but three wheels, or is it one?”

“There are still three, two quite good. From the third, one or two
spokes are missing, but that is a small loss. There must be other
wheels belonging to other carts which are no longer in existence.
I purpose to find one. If it does not match exactly, that makes no
difference.”

“But do you purpose to be steed as well as coachman?”

“Not at all. Behind a dilapidated house in a more dilapidated stable
resides at the moment a small donkey who in some manner has been
forgotten, or rather he was left behind because of the débris piled
around him. No doubt his owner fled in haste and could not dig him
out. I passed by the spot and examined it, discovering that it will not
be so difficult as appears to extricate the beast, so I shall dig him
out and there we have an equipage not to be despised, and much better
than a wheelbarrow in which I might have had to bundle you and that
poor Paulette.”

“Not me, for I could walk.”

“Part way, maybe, but there is no question of that as I see it.”

“What ingenuity, Victor. Who would have thought this out but you?”

“It has been great amusement, I assure you. Bravo! How I shall enjoy
driving Master Donkey. He seems a strong little beast, and was glad to
see me, the _coquin_. You should have heard his hee haw when I spoke to
him. Now about Paulette, is she able to travel?”

“She is fast recovering. She was stunned by the blow she received from
a falling stone and was weak from loss of blood. It was wonderful that
she escaped being killed outright. I am sure she will recover even more
rapidly when she hears of our good fortune in having such a courier
as Mons. Victor Guerin. It is all very dreadful, of course, Victor,
and last night I felt as if I could never smile again, but now that my
grandfather is safe, Paulette is better, and I have had some food my
spirits have risen.”

“Good! then perhaps you will be willing to go with me to recover that
donkey. Two are better than one at a task like that. Once the animal
is extricated we will feed him, then we will find a wheel for the cart
and can be off for a visit to that cow shed that you were so loath to
leave.”

“Detestable spot, how can you say I was loath to leave it?”

“When one spends an entire night in a place it is a sign that it has
its attractions.”

“Stop teasing. I stayed because there was nothing else to do, as you
well know. I never wish to see the place again.”

“Ah, but you will have to go with me to show me where it is.” Victor
gave her a merry glance.

Lucie shrugged her shoulders. “Well, it may be that so much is
necessary, and perhaps you can discover if there are really any eggs in
that nest. That is something I should like very much to know.”

It required some argument to convince Paulette that Lucie was necessary
to the expedition, but at last she was made to realize that this was
not a time for conventionalities and so the two young people started
off together, first to get out the donkey.




CHAPTER VI

MORE WAYS THAN ONE


The rescue of the donkey was not quite so easy a task as it looked to
be, but the two young people went at it heartily, Victor removing the
heavier stones and timbers which blocked the way, and Lucie undertaking
the smaller pieces. Master Donkey, whom Victor dubbed “Long Ears” for
want of a better name, meanwhile looked on attentively, his ears moving
in accord with his interest.

At last after an hour of rather exhausting labor, Victor exclaimed:
“There, Lucie, I think I can climb over now and get at Long Ears.
Donkeys are more sure-footed than horses and he can mount this pile of
stuff and pick his way along without doubt. You might stand there and
entice him with a handful of fresh grass.”

Lucie hunted around for such green stuff as she could collect from
crevices and corners, while Victor led forth the prisoner.

“Now he must have some food and drink,” declared Victor. “He must stand
in great need of it, poor fellow, and while he is partaking we will get
that wheel.”

“Where is it?” asked Lucie.

Victor laughed. “Ah, that is the joke of it. I haven’t an idea where
it is. I simply have faith to believe there is one; there must be. Who
ever saw a town that did not contain at least one discarded cart wheel
in the out-of-the-way corner of some stable-yard, or some such place? I
shall prowl around until I find it; that is all. Do you want to prowl,
too?”

Lucie declared herself eager to go with him on this quest, and they
started out, making inquiries as they went along and at last coming
upon the very odd corner that Victor had prophesied and where they
found the cart wheel of their desire. It was rather a dubious looking
affair, and its circumference was slightly less than those on the cart
which Victor had secured, but he declared it would serve, and, with the
help of an old man, managed to fasten it in place. Then they started
off for the cow shed in high good humor.

“It does not go badly, this cart,” maintained Victor, “and as for our
friend. Long Ears, he is none the worse for having served his time in
prison.”

“Ah, do not speak of him in that way,” chided Lucie. “It is as if he
had been a criminal.”

“He may be, who knows what evil deeds he may have done in his lifetime.”

But Lucie would none of this, and so they argued and made merry
upon that same road over which Lucie had traveled so wearily and
despairingly a few hours before.

They found everything intact at the shed. Victor lifted baskets and
bundles into the cart. “Now we will hunt for those eggs,” he said, “and
we may as well take the hen, too. Some one can make use of her, and she
will find it hard to scratch for a living here.”

“The eggs first. I am so very curious about those eggs, Victor. To
think that after all I shall find them.”

“Shall I climb up, or do you want to see for yourself?”

“I would very much like to see for myself.”

“Then you shall do so. I will lift you up so you can see.”

Lucie looked rather doubtful at this. She was not sure that she would
approve of this way to discovery. “Suppose you should let me fall, or
at least hold me so unsteadily that I should let the eggs fall.”

Victor took her objections good-naturedly. “Then shall I climb up?”

“Ye-es, I suppose you will have to,” admitted Lucie.

“I have it,” cried Victor wanting to indulge her. “I can back the cart
into the shed. There is plenty of room, and you can stand on that and
be perfectly sure of your footing.”

“Oh, Victor, what a perfectly lovely idea,” cried Lucie. And in a few
minutes the cart was standing beneath the shelf while Lucie climbed
upon it. She laughed down at Victor. “It cannot be said that one’s
footing is so very sure after all, for the cart is so rickety.”

“I think it will hold out. I will stand by Long Ears so he will not
bolt at a critical moment.”

Feeling herself doubly safe Lucie turned to view the shelf and what was
thereon. But the instant the head appeared above the top came again a
wild flutter of wings, and a second squawking hen, disturbed in her
retreat, flew in an agony of fright down from her nest and directly
upon the back of the donkey. Victor made a grab at her as she went
sailing by in a second flight, and Master Long Ears no longer feeling a
detaining hand, kicked up his heels and went clattering out the door,
bearing Lucie frantically trying to keep her feet and to get hold of
the reins.

Fortunately the donkey once outside stopped at sight of green fields
and began deliberately to crop the grass. Lucie collapsed in a fit of
mirth upon the floor of the cart. Victor came running out, at first
alarmed, and then ready to join in her laughter.

“It is not meant that I should get at those eggs,” declared Lucie. “You
will have to get them, Victor.”

[Illustration: Monsieur was wounded, night came, no one knew that he
lay there, there were so many. The little dog knew and he went out to
find him.]

“But what a remarkable hen,” remarked Victor, “to lay two eggs in a
day.”

Lucie went off again into another burst of laughter. “But, no,”
she cried, “it was not the same hen. That other was brown; this is
speckled. There are then two of them.”

“_Ma foi!_” cried Victor, “one does not have to go far for a joke even
in these days.”

He returned to the shed, climbed up to the shelf, and presently
reappeared with his pockets bulging. “My first foraging expedition,”
he announced, “and here are the fruits, a half dozen eggs. We will
commandeer these, a reserve for future use. We may be glad enough
of them on our way. As for those hens they will have to fend for
themselves, for there is no time to hunt them.” He deposited the eggs
in one of the baskets, they climbed back again into the cart, undertook
the task of persuading Long Ears to leave his pastures new, and finally
they were on their way back to the town, arriving without mishap; then,
with the consent of such authority as still existed, they set forth on
the more precarious expedition to the next station.

Victor realized that time was short and it would be a close shave for
him, for he must get back to camp at the proper hour. He had promised
to return the borrowed cart and donkey, but in doing this, he resolved
that he must let the future take care of itself. If he could not
return the borrowed articles in person, some one else could, and that
was all there was to it.

They began the second stage of their journey quite confidently. Life
again appeared worth living. Lucie sat by Victor’s side on the length
of board which served as a seat. Paulette, perched on a similar
board, was surrounded by baskets and bundles. She held firmly to her
green cotton umbrella from which she had not parted in all this time.
Sometimes she used it as a staff, sometimes it was laid across her
shoulders on the top of a pack she carried, again it found a place
on the top of a basket, but wherever it was Paulette evidently did
not mean to lose sight of it. Having renewed his strength the donkey
trotted along bravely enough, but the cart was less satisfactory. The
wheels spread apart in a manner that threatened collapse at any moment,
while the added fourth caused a queer joggle, a sort of limp, as it
were.

“It may not be the most luxurious way of riding,” observed Victor, “but
if we get there it will suffice.”

“Oh, Victor, do you think there is any danger of our not getting
there?” inquired Lucie in alarm.

Victor glanced down at the wavering wheel. “It will be good luck if we
do,” he replied, then seeing Lucie’s look of dismay he added: “but the
donkey is very strong; we can pile the luggage on him, then you and
Paulette can take turns in riding whatever portion of the road we still
have to travel.”

There was some comfort in this, and perhaps it was as well that Lucie
was warned, for at last after a threatening squeak, and a more than
ordinarily violent wabble, off came the wheel and went careering down
a gully at the side of the road. The cart gave a lurch, but Victor was
quick to spring out, and ran to the head of Long Ears who seemed to
have it in his mind either to bolt or to kick out with his hind legs.
He decided upon a mild performance of the latter feat, but his heels
could do little damage to the already decrepit cart, and under Victor’s
management he soon calmed down and stood meekly while he was being
unharnessed.

“Nobody hurt,” announced Victor cheerfully, “and we have not so very
far to go. I think we can manage it. Come, Paulette, let us have those
baskets. We can strap them on Long Ears pannier-wise, and we can make a
pillion of the contents of those bundles, or at least of part. We can
lay those on his back first and the straps which we can make of the
reins will hold them on.”

Paulette was quite used to a peasant manner of traveling, and lent a
hand skillfully, refusing absolutely to be the first to ride, so to
Lucie was given this honor.

Leaving the cart abandoned by the roadside they set off again, Lucie
sitting easily upon her improvised saddle and rather enjoying the
novelty. Victor walked by her side, declaring that one could not tell
what tricks a donkey might suddenly develop and it was well that one
should be on hand. At last Lucie declared that it was Paulette’s turn
to ride, and though at first she protested violently, the old woman
finally was persuaded that Lucie would be made uncomfortable if she
continued to refuse, so she mounted Long Ears and in this way the
little company at last arrived at their destination.

“Now,” said Victor, “the first thing is to discover Mons. Du Bois. If
he be here I can leave you in safety.”

“And if he is not here?” said Lucie with some trepidation.

Victor looked troubled. “I am afraid I shall have to leave you in any
case,” he answered slowly.

“O, Victor,” cried Lucie, “how can we get along without you?”

“Do you want him to be shot as a deserter?” asked Paulette severely.
“He must get back to his regiment, and he has none too much time as it
is.”

“Oh!” Lucie looked distressed. “I did not think, but--” She looked
questioningly at Paulette.

“Do not distress yourself, my child,” returned Paulette imperturbably.
“We shall get on. Monsieur, I beg that you will not embarrass yourself
further. We are not the only women who must travel alone, and I have
not a fear.”

“I trust to you, Paulette,” said Victor heartily. “You remain here. I
shall not be gone long.”

Paulette dismounted from her steed and led him to one side where they
would be less conspicuous. Lucie placed herself in a position to watch
the street down which Victor had gone, and which led to the railway
station. It was there that he intended first to go. He was as good as
his word, for presently Lucie cried: “Here he comes, Paulette, and
there is some one with him? If it should but be grandfather!”

Paulette looked searchingly at the two approaching figures. “But that
it is not,” she declared. “That is neither the form nor the gait of
Mons. Du Bois.”

Lucie drew a long sigh. “I did so hope,” she murmured.

In a few minutes Victor came up with a stout, middle-aged man. “This is
Mons. Carriere,” he announced. “He will do all in his power to locate
Mons. Du Bois. As for me, I find I must take a train in a few minutes,
but I am glad to leave you in safe hands.”

“How can I thank you for all you have done,” said Lucie, with a look of
regret in her eyes. “I wish you need not go, Victor, but I should like
less your having to be shot.”

Mons. Carriere looked inquiringly at Paulette.

“Mademoiselle means that monsieur must return to his regiment,” she
explained. “If you will believe it, monsieur has spent his entire leave
in transforming himself into an escort for us.”

“It is incredible,” exclaimed Mons. Carriere, turning to look at Victor.

“But, I assure you, monsieur, it was my duty,” declared Victor. “Are we
not in this war as much to protect our women as our land?”

“Well said, brave _garçon_,” cried Mons. Carriere, “but let me suggest,
monsieur, that if you wish to make that train, your opportunity is very
short.”

With that Victor grasped Lucie’s hands, kissed her upon either cheek,
did the same to Paulette and was off at a run for the station. Lucie
ran a short way the better to see the last of him, and stood where she
could have a view of the train already to be heard approaching.

Paulette wiped her eyes with the back of her hand. “He is pure gold,
that lad,” she said brokenly to Mons. Carriere. “Such courage, such
cheerfulness, such invention! When I think that he may be fodder for
cannon I cannot endure it.”

“It is such as he will save France,” returned Mons. Carriere. “We must
be willing to let them go, to die, perhaps, for their country. Death is
not the end.”

“You perhaps have no son to sacrifice,” returned Paulette.

“I have three,” replied he quietly, “and you, madame?”

“I have one and one only. He is a _poilu_ like yonder lad.”

“But you do not weep that he gives himself for his country?”

“I weep in secret, but also I am proud that he was one of the first to
go.”

The train was now moving out of the station. Paulette turned her back
upon it, but Lucie stood waving farewells to Victor, who in response
waved his adieux.

As Lucie came up Paulette wiped her eyes, turning to Mons. Carriere to
say hastily: “Do not let us mention Monsieur Victor, if you please.”

“He has gone, Paulette,” cried Lucie. “Is he not fine and brave? Ah me,
I wish--”

“_Cela ne fait rien_,” Paulette interrupted with a shrug of her
shoulders. “The next thing is to find Mons. Du Bois. What is gone is
gone.”

“Do you think it possible that my grandfather is here?” Lucie asked
Mons. Carriere.

“It is very possible. This young _poilu_, who has just left, charged me
to take you to a safe place, to house the donkey and to return it to
one Jacques La Rue when opportunity came. _Allons_, then, to my house
we go and then proceed to investigate. You are able to walk, madame? By
the way, have you been hurt that your head is bound up in such fashion?”

“She has shed her blood for France,” cried Lucie. “That wound was
caused by the enemy.”

“_Ma foi_, what a fantasie!” cried Paulette. “I assure you, monsieur,
that my hurt was caused simply by a falling wall. I was passing; the
wall gives way, the brick descends upon my head; that is all.”

“Ah, but the falling wall, that came from the bombs of the enemy,”
persisted Lucie. “Is it not, monsieur, that she has suffered for
France?”

“Most surely,” he answered. “She has been wounded, though indirectly,
by the enemy, and so is to be honored as a soldier.”

“There,” exclaimed Lucie, “it is as I said, Paulette.”

“La la,” she responded, “this sort of argument is a thing to make one
laugh, and quite aside from our business. Where is it we go, monsieur,
without wasting more words or time?”

“We go to my house where you rest until I have completed my quest for
Mons. Du Bois. If I do not discover him, then we will see what can be
done about your pursuing your journey to Paris. Meanwhile you have
nothing to do but make yourselves comfortable. My housekeeper will see
to that, I assure you.”

“But, monsieur,” Paulette began protesting.

He lifted his hand to silence her. “It is nothing. In these days one
takes what comes and says no word.”

They followed him up the street, turned a corner and halted before a
house which reminded Lucie of her own home. A green gate set in a white
wall led, probably, into just such another garden as she had left so
regretfully. It was through this gate that they entered, and, true to
Lucie’s expectations, the garden was there, holding the familiar trees
and flowers which spoke to her of home. Her lips trembled and her eyes
filled with tears. She stole a glance at Paulette whose face had a
wooden expression. She was looking neither to the right nor left.

“Marianne,” called Mons. Carriere.

A stout, middle-aged woman came to a side door.

“We have guests,” announced Mons. Carriere. “See that they have
everything to make them comfortable. They have passed through grievous
scenes, Marianne. They are victims of the war. This good woman, you
see, has been wounded, and mademoiselle here has become separated from
her parents, has passed the night alone in a cow shed in the very track
of the enemy.”

“_Mon Dieu!_” cried Marianne, hurrying down the steps. “Certainly,
monsieur, they shall of the best. I, myself, will see that they are
cared for. Enter, madame. Enter, mademoiselle. I am honored.”

They passed into the house, where Marianne bustled about in great
excitement and presently a plentiful meal was set before them to
which Mons. Carriere left them while he went forth upon his errand of
inquiry. It was not long before Paulette and Marianne were chattering
together like old friends, their conversation interspersed with many
pious ejaculations, and on Marianne’s part with many expressions of
astonishment. Soon tiring of their talk Lucie stole out into the
garden, finding it upon closer investigation very like, yet unlike, her
own. There was no stone bench. There was no cherry tree overhanging
the wall over which she might see Annette’s face appear. She wondered
what Annette was doing. This recalled Pom Pom, whose achievements had
been made the subject of some of Paulette’s recital. She wondered where
he was. In the excitement of her parting from Victor, and in reaching
this haven of rest, she had not thought of much except the possibility
of soon seeing her grandfather, forgetting for the moment all about
the little dog. The last she had seen of him he was at the station at
Victor’s heels.

Starting up from her seat in alarm she was about to reënter the house
when she heard at the gate a little whining sound, then a quick sharp
bark. “Pom Pom,” she called, “is it then you?”

A joyful bark answered. She ran to the gate, admitting the little
creature, who jumped upon her in wild delight. “I wonder where you
have been,” said Lucie, gathering him up in her arms. Pom Pom tried
to explain in dog language, but Lucie did not understand that he was
trying to tell her of his adventures, and that he had followed for some
distance a rapidly moving something which was bearing away his beloved
master, that finding he could not overtake this galloping monster he
had returned to the station, nosed about till he caught the right scent
and so had traced his second best beloved to this present spot.

“I suppose you are hungry,” remarked Lucie.

Pom Pom quite understood this and answered accordingly. His answer
brought Marianne to the door. “Is it this so wonderful dog you have
there?” she asked. “He shall have food of the best. If he prefers,
mademoiselle, he shall have it there in the garden. I will bring it to
him.”

She went off, soon returning with a dish of meaty scraps and a pan of
milk upon which Pom Pom set to work without delay, finishing up by
licking both pan and dish. Then he lay down contentedly at Lucie’s feet.

She had settled herself comfortably in a high-backed rustic chair which
stood invitingly in the shade. It was a delightful resting place. The
flitting of birds, the hum of bees, the odor of flowers, gave her a
homelike feeling. She was very tired, she realized, for she had endured
a rough journey, and her sleep of the night before had been none too
sweet. It was a kind Providence which had led her into such a spot as
this, yet, she reflected, it was all of Victor’s doing. Grandfather,
where was he? When would she hear from her parents? What of Annette?
These and other wandering questions passed through her mind, becoming
more and more vague till finally both little dog and little girl were
sound asleep.




CHAPTER VII

A STRANGE GARRET


The shadows had grown very long and the sunset light in the western sky
had faded to a twilight hue when Lucie was suddenly awakened by a sharp
bark from Pom Pom. She sat up expecting to see a more familiar face
than that of Mons. Carriere who bent over her. Pom Pom, as protector,
was protesting against the too near approach of any one save a member
of the family. As soon as Lucie came to a realizing sense of where she
was, she sprang up asking eagerly: “My grandfather? Have you found him?”

“Alas, no, my child,” was the disappointing reply. “It seems that he
has not reached this town as yet.”

“But what--where is he then?”

Mons. Carriere hesitated. “That one cannot tell at once. In these
times a thousand things might happen. He may have been turned aside
on account of danger from the guns. He may have taken another road, a
longer, though perhaps better. It will do no harm to wait a little.
Give him time. You are more than welcome to remain as my guest. Content
yourself, my child. If, after a reasonable time, he does not come,
then we will see what next.”

“But monsieur--” Lucie began to protest.

“La la, there is nothing to say, not a word. Let us go in and see what
that Marianne has for us.”

There was indeed nothing to do but to accept the hospitality so readily
offered, so Lucie went in, but though her host did his best to make her
feel at ease and to declare himself fortunate in having the opportunity
of entertaining a guest at table, Lucie felt too troubled to enjoy her
meal very much, though she realized that Fate had been kinder to her
than to most refugees. She made an effort to appear cheerful, but her
wistful smile went to Mons. Carriere’s heart, and made him even more
fatherly in his manner toward her.

He left her to Paulette when the meal was over, and then these two
conferred together.

“I am troubled, so troubled, Paulette,” said Lucie. “I am most
unfortunate. My father wounded, my mother lost, my grandfather who
knows where?”

“Take heart, my child, it is not so bad as it appears,” Paulette made
the effort to console her. “It is much better than yesterday when your
only shelter was a cow shed and you were entirely alone. Your father
lives, we are assured, and since he has recovered thus far we may
believe that he has turned the corner. Your mother is with him, no
doubt, and as for your grandfather, there is no need to worry about
him, for he is with friends who will look after him. One must do what
one can in these times, and I have my belief that we shall find him in
Paris waiting for us.”

“Then do we go on at once?”

“Not at once. In another day, I think. We must give them another day.
This is a good place. One finds it peaceful, restful. This Marianne
so friendly, monsieur so kind. Yes, it is not showing appreciation to
hurry away without reason. Another day, _chèrie_. We will take a good
night’s rest and let the morrow take care of itself.”

“Do you think grandfather will be here then?”

“It may be. If not we shall meet him in Paris. We have had that message
of his. It is enough.” And with this Lucie was obliged to be satisfied.

It had been an eventful day, but its excitements appeared to Lucie no
greater than those to which she looked forward in that great city of
Paris, which place she half feared, then longed to see. Was it there
that their home was to be henceforth, and what would it be like? She
could not form any picture of it in her mind, but wherever it might
be it was there that she would next see her parents. She fell asleep
wondering how soon they would all be united, and slept soundly, the “so
intelligent dog” curled up at her feet.

She awoke bright and early the next morning, at first imagining
herself back in her own room, though she soon perceived the difference
and sat up, the better to observe what she had failed to take in the
night before. It was a clean, orderly little room adorned with such
things as appeal to a young man’s taste, and she concluded that one of
those three sons must have occupied it before he went soldiering.

“At least it is not a cow shed,” she remarked to Pom Pom, “although for
my part I do not care for those funny things upon the wall.” She was
attracted by a pair of foils and fencing gloves at which she looked
curiously, then gave her attention to other manly adornments of the
room. These, however, did not keep her attention very long, for she
remembered the eventful journey which was probably before her, and
soon made ready to go downstairs to glean such news as might have been
gathered during the night. She found Paulette still in the rôle of
heroine recounting her adventures to a group of Marianne’s friends.
She stopped short at sight of Lucie and the little company of gossips
dispersed so that Lucie was left alone with Paulette, whom she began to
consider rather a person of importance who might very well direct their
future plans.

“What news? What news?” she asked. “Has anything been heard of my
grandfather?”

“Nothing,” replied Paulette, “and no news is good news. As for other
things they say the Germans are still advancing and that the people are
flocking from the villages by thousands. Those that do not flee must
remain to be under German rule. We are lucky, we, to have come when we
did.”

“What would have happened if we had stayed?”

“If we were not killed by the bombardment, we would have been caught
like rats in a trap.”

“Would they have killed us?” asked Lucie in horror.

“One cannot say, but for my part I should not like the idea of being
forced to obey a boche.”

“But do you think, could it be that mother and grandfather have been
caught that way?”

“Pst!” Paulette made a scornful snap of her fingers. “Dispose of that
notion. We shall hear quite otherwise. We shall know the truth about
them before long. In Paris everything is known. They say that one
cannot wink without the thing being known by the police.”

“What do we do first when we get to Paris?” Lucie inquired, full of
curiosity. “Where do we go? Is it to a place we shall live till my
parents arrive, and will it be in the heart of the city or in the
suburbs? Shall we have a garden, do you think?”

“La la,” cried Paulette, “what questions! How is one to tell till we
get there?”

“Shall we have plenty of money? Are we going to be very poor? Have you
enough in case grandfather is delayed in coming?”

“Such questions!” cried Paulette again. “We shall not at once starve,
though what is in the future who can say? The business is a thing of
the past; it is no more, and one must exercise economy of course, but
we shall see what we shall see. Rest tranquil for the present, my
pigeon; to-day we shall dine.” And no more could Lucie learn.

Though anxiously looked for, no news of Mons. Du Bois came that day.
Acting on the advice of Mons. Carriere, Lucie wrote to her grandfather
in the care of Jacques Moulin, and then Paulette determined that they
must set out the next morning, although Mons. Carriere protested, and
begged that they would remain where they were till something definite
had been learned about Mons. Du Bois. But Paulette, with the obstinacy
of her class, insisted that there was but one thing to be done, and
that was to carry out Mons. Du Bois’s orders. He had said that if they
missed him, failed to meet him in this town, they were to go on to
Paris and communicate with him there, so to Paris they must go and that
was the end of it.

Their good host did all that he could to smooth the way for them. He
directed them to a small and inexpensive hotel, urged them to let him
know how they fared and if in any difficulty to notify him, so they set
out quite cheerfully and hopefully.

The journey occupied more time than they supposed it would, for the
distance was not great and in ordinary times would have taken but a few
hours, but now there were frequent stops, cautious and slow advances,
but at last Paris was reached and they stood on the platform of the
Gare du Nord, Paulette still holding fast to her green umbrella and Pom
Pom capering about in delight at being released from confinement. They
drove to the quiet little hotel which Mons. Carriere had recommended,
and here began Lucie’s life in Paris, whether to be of long or short
period who could tell?

It was rather disappointing to Lucie from the outset. The small hotel
seemed a stuffy, shabby place after the daintiness and freshness of her
own home. Paulette was overcome with fear at the traffic in the streets
and dared not venture out, nor would she for a moment allow Lucie to go.

“You? Alone? A young maid in the streets of Paris? _Ciel!_” she
exclaimed. “It would be as a lamb among wolves. No, no, my child, it is
not to be thought of.”

“But, Paulette,” protested the girl, “it is so stupid here. I thought
Paris would be very gay, and here in this dark little street where one
can see so little it is anything but gay, and I do not like it.”

“One cannot look for gayety in war time,” returned Paulette grimly,
“and what one wants is not what one may look to receive.”

This Spartan-like response was very discouraging, and leaving Paulette
to arrange and rearrange the various baskets and bundles, Lucie went to
the window to gaze out into the street. A dismal rain was now falling,
and such little light as might be was intercepted by the tall buildings
opposite. It was not a very pleasing outlook and there was nothing
going on in the street itself that particularly invited attention, yet
Lucie, in order to pass away the time, sat for a long time with elbows
on the window sill, looking out.

She was aroused by a sudden remark of Paulette’s. “One cannot afford
this very long,” she said. “Unless we hear from your grandfather by
to-morrow morning we must seek this Mons. Moulin.”

Lucie turned away from the window and seated herself upon a worn and
faded armchair. “But, Paulette, you tell me you are so afraid in the
streets, and how could we ever find the way, in the rain too?”

“Are there not telephones?” returned Paulette.

[Illustration: Sitting on the topmost step, her head buried in her arm,
sobbing her heart out.]

“To be sure. We might have thought of that at once, and so relieved
our minds. Will you go down with me and see about it now, Paulette? We
know the address so it should not be difficult to find it in the book.
Shall we go?”

“The sooner the better,” responded Paulette. So down they went to the
telephone below. Paulette grudgingly produced the necessary coin to
pay for the call, and after some delay they managed to get hold of
the operator, but after what seemed an unconscionable time they were
informed that no response came to the call.

“It is probably a place of business and too late to find the
proprietor,” suggested the old man in charge of the office. “To-morrow,
mademoiselle, in the morning, no doubt you will find him without
difficulty.”

But in the morning they met with no greater success. “No answer,”
reported the operator.

“What can it mean?” Lucie turned in bewilderment to the old man.

“Probably this person has moved away.”

“Then what shall we do?”

“One would best go to the place and find out. There are neighbors, no
doubt, who can tell where the person has gone.”

“We shall have to go. There is nothing left to do,” said Lucie, turning
to Paulette. “Is it far, monsieur?” she asked. She showed the old man
the slip of paper on which she had written the address.

He read it and shrugged his shoulders. “Far enough.”

“But one can walk?” put in Paulette.

“Perhaps, if one knows the way; otherwise one must ride. A cab is not
so easy to procure these days; an omnibus, perhaps. It will be much
cheaper.”

“The cab, no. I will not go to the expense,” declared Paulette firmly.
“As to the omnibus--well, that too is a venture. How does one tell when
to get out? It is all very bewildering, this.” Always a resourceful
person, she now looked more worried than Lucie had ever seen her.

“Perhaps we could find some one to go with us,” the happy thought came
to Lucie.

“That is well thought of,” said the man, who was a good sort and really
quite concerned. “At another time I could accompany you myself, but in
these days--” He shook his head. “I am here to look after the business
of my son who has gone to the war, I who thought myself retired and
comfortable for the rest of my days. But what will you? I cannot let
the business go to the dogs. It is bad enough as it is, yet one must
hold on to it. I will think what can be done. My grandson might go; he
is at school, but when he returns we shall see.”

This relieved the situation in most directions, though Paulette had
many misgivings about trusting herself to the guardianship of so young
a lad as the little André was, and went forth in fear and trembling.
Lucie, on the contrary, was delighted at being able to see something
of the city. The rain had ceased, though it was still cloudy. André
chattered away, pointed out landmarks, answered questions glibly, and
was altogether a very satisfactory companion. Lucie thought Paulette
stalked along with the air of being ready to challenge any one who
looked her way, and though she bore herself stoically when they came to
the crowded crossings, Lucie could see that she was in an agony of fear
and dread.

At last they reached the street and number which should be that
of Jacques Moulin’s establishment. It was closed, doors locked,
windows barred. A notice read: “_Fermez; le propriétaire est sous les
drapeaux_.”

“_Mon Dieu!_” exclaimed Paulette, “but this is a thing terrible.”

Lucie was not so easily daunted. “We will inquire next door,” she said,
and forthwith proceeded to investigate.

An elderly man answered her questions. “Jacques Moulin?” Yes, to be
sure. He had gone, departed to the war. The business had been suspended
until after the war; who knew how long that might be? Had one Antoine
Du Bois been here recently inquiring for this same Moulin? The man
considered. He shook his head. No, there had been no one of that name,
of that he was positive.

Entirely at a loss what to do next, the little party turned away after
having secured the address of the firm with which Jacques Moulin had
consolidated. Paulette scarcely spoke on the way back; she was too
deeply occupied with puzzling out plans for the future. Lucie, too,
though she kept one ear open for André’s chatter, was disturbed in her
mind.

“What are we to do, Paulette? What are we to do?” she asked once they
were back in their rooms.

Paulette dived down into the depths of a pocket under her petticoats
and drew forth a queer little pouch the contents of which she shook out
into her lap, many sous, some franc pieces, a few five franc coins, one
paper note. She counted it all over laboriously. “This will serve for
a time,” she said at last, “and then the deluge. At once we must find
cheap lodgings, and then I shall look for employment; it should not be
difficult to find this when so many men have gone. I shall succeed. Oh
yes, I shall succeed.”

Lucie sat mute and distressed while Paulette made her calculations.
“But, Paulette,” she broke out finally, “is it necessary to do this? My
grandfather surely will appear very soon, and then there is my father’s
pay. When he knows our needs, of course he will see to it that we have
money.”

Paulette looked at her pityingly. “_Pauvre petite_, one may not look
at things through such rose-colored glasses. It might happen that the
affair would run smoothly, but how do we know that your father is yet
well enough to attend to such matters? This in the first place, and in
the second it might delay his recovery if he were given cause to worry.
Again, affairs of government are not arranged in a moment. Papers must
be prepared, sent to this one, that, and who knows how many months may
pass before all is arranged? Meanwhile are we to sit and suck our paws
like bears?”

“You know a great deal, don’t you, Paulette?” said Lucie much impressed.

“I have ears. I know what I hear,” returned Paulette. “Moreover,” she
went on, “who am I that I should not work? I have always worked, even
as a little child. I should be lost, desolated, without work. Am I to
sit up like a lady and fold my hands at my time of life? No, no, the
sooner I get to work the better.”

“But I cannot bear the idea of your working to feed me,” said Lucie.

“And who has a better right? Did I not nurse you, and have I not served
your family always, always.”

“Nevertheless,” began Lucie.

“La la, if it comes to that,” interrupted Paulette, “when I am too old
to work we can settle the score. That is finished. Now something else.
We telephone to these people whose address you have just learned. We
learn what we learn. Then at once we look for other lodgings. When we
leave here we leave the new address with the old one so that any may
know where to find us. That is all.” She carefully replaced the money,
securely tied up the little bag and put it back in her deep pocket,
then rose to carry out the plans she had made.

At the end of twenty-four hours Paulette had accomplished what she set
out to do, and Lucie found herself high up in an attic room, in an
old part of the city. “It is not magnificent but it will serve,” was
Paulette’s comment as they took possession. Lucie made no answer. It
seemed a mean and poor habitation to her. Its one redeeming feature was
a window which overlooked what had been an old convent garden, and gave
opportunity for the sun to find its way into the room, and for the girl
to see a bit of sky above the housetops. She foresaw that this would be
her favorite spot, and that a chair by the window would save her from a
feeling of utter desolation. “All the same I shall never cease to feel
like a cat in a strange garret,” she said to herself, as she turned
away from the window to help Paulette stow away their very modest
belongings.




CHAPTER VIII

A BIT OF SKY


Probably no quarter of the city could have suited Lucie and Paulette
better than the one to which good fortune guided them. Paulette,
while always declaring that she hated Paris and that she counted the
days till she could again return to her own home, nevertheless soon
became accustomed to the neighborhood and hobnobbed with dames of her
own degree, becoming as canny a _femme de ménage_ as any, doing her
marketing with an eye to the main chance and learning where one could
best shop for this or that commodity. With her usual good sense she had
looked for work of such kind as she could best do, and was engaged by
two families to do a certain amount of work, buy the food and cook the
midday meal, this employment occupying only her mornings, so that Lucie
would not be left alone the entire day.

Many were the charges given to the little girl when Paulette went off
to her work. She was not to leave the room on any pretext. She was not
to open to any one. She was not to play with fire.

At this last order Lucie always laughed. “One would think me a baby,”
she would declare.

“One cannot be too careful,” was Paulette’s invariable reply. “You are
ambitious, and some day you may attempt to cook the meal, and then
what?”

In her secret heart Lucie did cherish such an ambition in order that
she might surprise Paulette by having the meal ready upon the good
woman’s return, so she never had a response ready.

“I will tell that Mathilde, below there, to let no one up,” said
Paulette as usual, one morning as she went out.

“But supposing it should be grandfather or one of my parents,” returned
Lucie.

“That is another thing. Mathilde would understand, yet I do not
expect she will have so good news to tell me when I return, for it is
ill news we are having now. This morning I hear that the town where
that excellent Mons. Carriere lives has fallen into the hands of the
Germans.”

“Oh!” Lucie was startled. “What do you suppose will happen to him?”

“Who knows? With the Boches nearing Paris it is as much as one can do
to keep faith and hope alive.”

“Oh, Paulette, will they really get here, do you think?”

“They have moved the government to Bordeaux.”

“How fearful! But the people will not let them in, will they?”

Paulette compressed her lips to a hard line. “Not till they have killed
every _poilu_ on the way. Do not distress yourself, my little one. They
are not here yet. It is merely as a precaution that the government
removes itself. Now I go. Do not leave the place nor let any one in the
door.” And picking up her baskets she went out.

Lucie often went with Paulette to the little market and was never at a
loss for entertainment there, whether it was listening to the arguments
carried on between seller and buyer, in watching the people or in
giving an ear to the gossip of Paulette and some other peasant-born
woman. Pom Pom always went along, too, and generally managed to pick up
some bit of meat, a luxury to him as well as to most. On the way home
there was always a halt at a church in whose solemn and silent interior
prayers were offered up for those about whom all were anxious.

The little dog was great company for Lucie, and since there was no
Mousse to claim Paulette’s attention, she too bestowed her favor upon
Pom Pom. Probably he enjoyed, as much as the other two, the almost
daily visit to the park near by when both Lucie and Paulette would
take their knitting and sit under the trees with numbers of others
all knitting, knitting for the soldiers. The streets were very quiet
these days. One saw few young men unless it be a wounded man in
uniform, perhaps minus a leg or arm, or maybe blinded and guided by
some other. At night it was very dark, scarce a light to be seen, and
it was terrifying when more than once up from the street below would
come the shrill alarm of the pompiers: _garde à vous_, and this meant
that one must look out for the Zeppelins. Being at the top of the house
there was more danger for Lucie, Paulette and their neighbors on that
floor than for those below, and Paulette never failed to rout Lucie
out of bed, gather up Pom Pom and flee to the lowest floor where lived
Madame Mathilde, who was concierge, if so modest a house can be said to
possess a concierge.

It was one day when Paulette had gone off to her work that Lucie was
busy with her knitting, looking off between whiles at the bright clouds
floating over the tops of buildings and lending a radiance to a spire
here, a window there, when somehow the whole view made her think of an
evening with her mother just before the sad breaking up came. “Always
look up, dear daughter, and find a bit of sky,” her mother had said.
“One’s soul is seldom absolutely shut in. Between branches and roofs
one can generally find a shining piece of sky.” It all came back to
the girl now, those happy home days, those quiet talks in the garden.
She was very lonely, and liked the big city no better than Paulette
did, who was always declaring that the only thing which kept her from
returning, Germans or no Germans, was the fact that Mons. Du Bois might
appear at any moment and be distressed at not finding his granddaughter.

Lucie came to the toe of the stocking upon which she was at work. This
was the difficult place over which Paulette always helped her, so she
laid it aside till Paulette should return. This was the signal for Pom
Pom to arouse from his nap and to beg for a frolic. He jumped upon
Lucie, wagging his tail, and giving little sharp barks.

“Not so much noise, Pom,” chided Lucie. “Did you hear the _pompier_
last night? I know you did for you trembled and whined your fear. Well,
Paulette declares we would be safer in our old home, so we may take to
the road again. Come, you must have your soldier clothes, for you may
have to fight for us.”

Pom Pom backed away, for this was a game that he did not care for,
but seeing that there was no help for it he meekly submitted to being
dressed up in the funny little coat and cap which Annette and Lucie had
made for him.

“Now come show yourself to the people,” said Lucie after he was
attired. “You must let them see that there is a _poilu_ here to help
in the defense of the city.”

She carried him over to the open window and held him so he stood
upright upon his hind legs, though he did not like this one little bit,
and began to whine his protests. Lucie expostulated with him. “I am
surprised at you, Pom Pom; a soldier of France, a _poilu_, to act as if
he were afraid. That is no way to behave. You were brave enough when we
were on the road. Here, here, show how you can sing the Marseillaise:
‘_Aux armes, citoyens_.’”

A very shrill, high-pitched whine was Pom Pom’s accompaniment to
Lucie’s song, the whine increasing in shrillness as the song proceeded.

Presently Lucie was aware of an audience, for she heard a mirthful
laugh, and looking across to the next window she saw the head of a
bright-eyed little girl.

“How he is amusing, this dog,” said the child. “Is he yours, and what
is his name?”

“Yes, he is mine and he is called Pom Pom,” Lucie replied.

“He must be much company for you.”

“Certainly I should be very lonely without him. I do not know in fact
what would become of me without him when I am here so long alone.”

“Why are you alone?”

“Because I have no brothers or sisters. I know no one here in Paris.
My father has gone to the war. My mother has gone to the hospital where
he lies wounded. My grandfather has lost himself on the road to this
city, and I have arrived here with only our old servant, Paulette. We
were obliged to leave our home, you see, when the Germans came.”

“Ah, but you are better off than I am, for your parents are still
living. My dear papa was killed in the war, and my mamma died, the
little baby too; it was such a little baby, and she was too ill to make
such a long journey on foot. I am here with the old aunt of my father,
and we lodge with a friend of hers. They must both go to work every
day, so I am also alone. It is very _triste_, this place, is it not?
One misses so many things, particularly the animals and the garden.”

“You mean this Paris? You do not belong here then?”

“No, I come from Picardy.”

“Then we are comrades,” cried Lucie, “for I come from the Aisne
district, and like you I have left my home to come to this place of
refuge. What is your name?”

“I am called Odette, Odette Moreau.”

“And I am Lucie Du Bois.”

“I wish I could come to see you and your dog,” said Odette.

Lucie hesitated a moment, remembering Paulette’s charges, but she
managed to get around the subject by saying: “Why can’t you? When
Paulette comes back she will permit me to open the door, though while
she is out I may not.”

Odette laughed. “My case is even worse, for I am locked in.”

“Then when those old ones return we can visit, I hope.”

“I shall like that. Do you not think you’d better take in your dog? The
police do not allow us to place anything on the window sill, you know.”

“But Pom Pom is not a thing,” returned Lucie laughing; “I consider him
a person.”

Odette laughed in response but drew in her head and Lucie did the
same. Paulette would not return for another hour, during which time
would hang heavy on her hands. She wished that Paulette were not so
particular, and that Odette’s guardians were not such exacting ones.
“There could not be the slightest objection to my opening the door to
Odette, that I know,” she said to Pom Pom. “If only she could get out I
certainly would do it. Hark! What is that?”

Pom Pom pricked up his ears and growled at a sharp noise which seemed
to come from the next room.

“Hush, Pom Pom; it is not possible to find out what that is when you
make such a fuss,” said Lucie. “It cannot be a bird, yet what else?
Certainly that is something tapping on the window. I will go and peep.
Softly now, softly.”

She tiptoed to the next room, and saw pressed against the window pane
the merry face of Odette. In another moment the window was opened and
in slipped the little neighbor.

Lucie looked at her in amazement. “How in the world did you get here?”
she asked.

Odette laughed. “It was not so difficult. I could not open my door
and you were not permitted to open yours, so I told myself that one
must contrive another way. There was nothing said about windows, you
perceive, therefore I come by way of windows.”

“But how?” repeated Lucie.

“Where there are trap doors, roofs, and gutters it is easy to one
who is used to climbing,” returned Odette with a little shrug of the
shoulders and a nonchalant air.

“So then you climbed through a trap door, down the roof, made your way
across a gutter and dropped down on the balcony outside there. I don’t
see how you had the courage. I can climb trees but when it comes to a
thing like this--” Lucie shook her head in sheer wonder at the audacity
of it.

“I am not one to lose my head,” returned Odette serenely.

“But if you had fallen.”

“I should have been killed, instantly. What matter? One must die
sooner or later, and at least I have no one to grieve for me. So much
the sooner would I meet my father and mother again. Now I shall stay
till those old ones return and we shall tell each other of what has
been, and what has come to us in these sad days.”

But Lucie’s thoughts were still upon Odette’s daring deed. “Suppose you
had been seen from the street; the police would have come dashing in,
and then--”

“But I was not upon the window sill,” interrupted Odette laughing.
“Moreover, I was not seen, for at this moment every one eats and
there were few to look up, for those who were not indoors eating were
thinking of what they should eat, and one does not look for food in the
skies or on roofs. No, I assure you, I was quite safe.”

So the subject was dismissed and Lucie led the way into her little
room, saying, “It is more pleasant here by my window. We will sit here
and tell of our adventures.”

“And will the little dog sit in my lap? I had a dear dog at home but he
is also dead, killed by a bomb, they said. It was strange that I did
not weep when I was told, but I think I had no more tears. I shed them
all when my mother died.” Into the child’s brown eyes came a haunted
look, as if she were seeing things beyond power of words to tell. She
was a slightly built, thin little creature, not so tall as Lucie and of
darker skin.

The tears came to Lucie’s eyes as she lifted Pom Pom into her
visitor’s lap. The dog looked inquiringly at his mistress but seemed
to understand that he was to remain, and was very quiet under the
caressing touch of Odette’s hand.

“We had a little farm,” Odette went on, “and we were very happy, but
I shall never see that home again, for it does not exist. There is
nothing there, nothing but deep holes in the ground, no trees, no
house, no barn; all is destroyed, the house and barn burned, the trees
cut down, the fields plowed up by bullets and bombs. There is nothing
to go back to, and no one is there. Oh, I know, for I have heard my
aunt tell it over and over again, and when I shut my eyes at night I
can imagine it, that horrible place of holes where no one lives. I do
not wish to see it, but sometimes I dream of my home, yet when I wake I
know it is only a dream, only a dream.” She shook her head mournfully,
and the tragic expression in her eyes deepened. In another moment,
however, she tossed up her head with a gesture of defiance. “I will not
think of it. I will think only of France, and of her soldiers. You have
a soldier papa. Tell me of him and of your home.”

“My papa is a captain. He went at once. He was wounded, but at last
news he was improving. Paulette managed to find out this, and we are
now trying to get word of my mamma, and of my grandfather. We expected
to find my grandfather here in Paris, but he has not come and those
good ladies at the _ouvroir_ are trying to find out what has become of
him. Our home was not a farm but in a small town where my father had a
factory as his father had before him. We are afraid all is destroyed,
but we do not know. We had a pretty garden and such pleasant neighbors.
I hope, oh, I do hope all is not destroyed, and that we can go back. I
cannot imagine being happy anywhere else.”

Odette looked at her compassionately. “It seems that you are very
young,” she said. “Me, I feel so old. I think I have lived many years
in a few weeks, and yet I am only fifteen.”

“And I only a year younger,” Lucie said. “Why do I seem so young to
you, Odette?”

“Because you still have things to expect, to hope for. I have nothing,
because all has been taken.”

“Oh, but Odette!”

“La, la, let us not speak of it. I shall laugh and be gay, very gay
like the soldiers. Is it for the soldiers you are knitting?”

“Yes, but I cannot do the toe of my sock without Paulette. I am very
stupid about it.”

“Ah, that is where I can help you, for I have been knitting socks
for so long a time I cannot remember when I began it. Give me your
knitting, I shall like to work upon it.” She took the sock which Lucie
handed to her, and at once made the needles fly so fast that Lucie
looked on in admiration.

“What a brisk worker,” exclaimed the latter. “You are very clever,
Odette.”

“Oh, not at all. I do everything at a gallop; it has always been my
way. Where is it that your father is?”

“Somewhere in the provinces, Paulette said, and he will then be sent
to another place where the convalescents are. Paulette is so timid, so
afraid in this Paris that she will not venture anywhere that she is not
obliged to go, neither will she allow me to go. I think there may be
places where one could find out things, but we are ignorant of them,
and can only do so much.”

Odette nodded understandingly. “We of the country are afraid in this
city so large. Me, when the time comes I shall go back to the country,
somewhere in the country. I know not where; so says my aunt and so say
I.”

“Hark,” said Lucie, jumping up, “there comes Paulette. She may seem
severe, but she is kind, oh, so kind, and you will not mind when she
looks at you sharply; it is her way, that is all.”

“One knows the way of these old ones,” returned Odette imperturbably,
going on with her knitting.

Paulette came to the door, and, as Lucie had warned, looked sharply at
the little visitor. “And pray who is this?” she asked.

“It is our next door neighbor, Odette Moreau.”

“Then you have opened the door to her,” Paulette said this
disapprovingly.

Odette looked up with a mischievous smile.

“That she did not, Madame,” she said.

“One cannot open it without a key,” said Paulette, shaking her head,
“and there is no other way of entering.”

“Ah, but there is, Madame, and I took that way.” There was such a
roguish look in Odette’s eyes that Lucie laughed.

“You are mocking me, and trying to deceive me, but me, I am not one to
be deceived even in this so great city,” declared Paulette.

“But I am not deceiving you,” protested Odette, “and if you wish to
know how I entered I will tell you that it was by the window.”

“The window!” Paulette gazed at the window of the little room as if she
expected to see at least a ladder there.

“Not this one, but that in the other room,” Odette went on. “There is a
small balcony there if you remember.”

“But one cannot reach it except from the room. That is a poor method,
mademoiselle, of getting out of a bad situation.”

“There are airplanes and balloons.” Odette placidly kept on with the
knitting while Paulette’s sharp eyes noted the rapidity with which she
made the needles fly.

“But that is absurd,” said the good woman.

“This is but a ruse,” She turned to Lucie. “I desire to know how this
young person came to find her way in here.”

“It is as she said; she came by the window,” Lucie told her with a
smile.

“But this is too ridiculous,” declared Paulette, walking off with a
troubled look.

“Come back! Come back, and we will tell you all about it.” Lucie ran
after her. “She was lonely, this poor little Odette, shut up, locked
in indeed. We saw each other from the window, and when we learned that
we were both refugees and both from Picardy, figure to yourself how
easy it was to become acquainted. I might not open my door; she could
not unlock hers, for her aunt has taken the key. Oh, she is clever
and very brave, this Odette. What do you think she did? She climbed
through a trap door upon the roof, and dropped as easily as a bird upon
the balcony. She tapped upon the window; I heard her and let her in.”
Then before Paulette could censure, Lucie hastened to continue her
story. “And, Paulette, it is so sad; there is her father dead upon the
battlefield, her home burned to the ground. Her poor mother with her
little baby died on the way when they were escaping from the Germans.
Think of being shut up alone with such memories. Do you wonder that she
longed for some one to speak to?”

Paulette sighed. “It was a great risk and altogether wrong,” she said,
“but I do not wonder, and since she is here she must stay till she can
get back.” In her secret heart she admired the reckless deed quite as
much as she did the expert way in which Odette handled the knitting
needles. Therefore back she went to speak more graciously to the little
neighbor, and to bid her welcome.

This was the beginning of an acquaintance, the result of which none of
them foresaw, nor did they dream of the part little Odette should have
in their lives.




CHAPTER IX

SHOES


After this there was not a day passed that Lucie and Odette were
not together, for while Odette belonged to the peasant class and
Lucie to the bourgeois, this was no time for distinctions, and
Paulette countenanced the acquaintance not only because Odette was a
well-behaved young person, but because the two little girls were lonely
and were companions in misery. Besides all this Odette was so alert and
capable, knew so much of domestic affairs, that Paulette was convinced
in time that she could trust the two girls to cook a meal, and to do
many of the things which heretofore she had never admitted could be
done by any one but herself. Like most in her walk of life, Paulette
was suspicious, and must satisfy herself as to the character of those
neighbors with whom Odette lived.

“They are old, those two next door,” she reported to Lucie the day
after Odette’s first visit.

“As old as you, Paulette?” asked Lucie innocently.

“As old as I? _Ma foi_, one would suppose me an ancient, I who have a
young son no older than eighteen. Those two could be my mother.”

“Both of them? It would be funny to have two mothers,” replied Lucie
mischievously.

“Zut!” exclaimed Paulette contemptuously. “It is this city, no doubt,
which teaches you to be so witty. I repeat they are of an age when I
might be a daughter to either one. They are given work at the _ouvroir_
of _les Dames Americaine_, but very little pay; three francs a day the
two of them receive, but they maintain that it suffices. For me I make
more, yet it is well to remember this _ouvroir_. One never knows what
may happen. They have no allotment to depend upon, those two poor old
bodies, for they have not a son in the army, as I have.”

“I have a father, should not I have an allotment?” asked Lucie.

“It goes to your mother, of course,” returned Paulette. “Do not worry
over that; you are too young. We have enough, perhaps we do not feast,
but at least we do not starve.” She paused to give herself up to
meditating upon what Lucie had suggested, then she broke out with:
“And even supposing there were an allotment for you, it would be small
enough, and how would one go about getting it for you? It is not for
me to say, and we had better think no more about it.”

“I like that Odette,” remarked Lucie, “and I am very glad she is so
near that I can see her every day. Did you ask her aunt if she would
let her come?”

“I asked, yes, for they seem respectable, though they were horrified to
discover what the child had done, and no wonder. She has always been
very venturesome, said the aunt. ‘I call it more than venturesome; I
call it foolhardy,’ said the other.”

“And what do you call it?” asked Lucie.

Paulette shrugged her shoulders. “It is as one looks at those things.
For you I should call it imbecile, for this other who is as thin and
lithe as a monkey it is another thing, I would not have her do it
again, but for this once it shows what she is made of. She would not
hesitate, that one. If she saw a thing must be done, she would do it
without delay.”

“I like that,” returned Lucie. “It is as our soldiers do.”

“And as the wives of soldiers must do,” which remark showed Lucie that
Odette was approved.

It was the very next day that Paulette came home with a long face. She
put down her basket with a heavy sigh, and paid no attention to Pom
Pom’s joyous greetings.

“What is it, Paulette?” asked Lucie anxiously. “Are you ill?”

“In mind; not body.”

“But why? What has happened? Don’t tell me, Paulette, that there is
some new misfortune.”

“It is a misfortune that I am deprived of the means of earning a fair
living. Madame Lemercier is leaving the city to-day and Madame Gouraud
goes next week. They fear to remain, and are going to the south where
they have friends.”

“Oh, Paulette, what are we to do? I did not expect that I should be
hearing such news as this.”

“Nor did I expect, when I spoke of those old ones and the _ouvroir_
which is helping them, that Paulette Ribot might have to accept charity
from the hands of strangers. But she will not, no, she will not, if
there is work for her in this city. To-morrow begins the search for it.”

“Those two for whom you have been working, Madame Lemercier and Madame
Gouraud, did they know of no one who would like a _femme de ménage_?”

“_Hélas!_ they did not. I asked, of course, but what would you when
they were all absorbed in their preparations for leaving? No, what
comes to one must be first sought for.”

Lucie sighed. “I wish there were something I could do, for soon my
shoes will be gone, and yours, too, my Paulette; then we shall want
warm things for the winter.”

“It will not be difficult if one can get work, for I still have a
little hoard and there is Jean’s allotment when it comes. Do not
be uneasy, my child. I begin to-morrow to hunt the city over for
employment.”

“But, Paulette, you do not know the city, and you are afraid to go
anywhere except in those streets with which you are acquainted.”

Paulette puffed out her cheeks and threw back her head. “Zut!” she
exclaimed. “Have I then less courage than that little skinny ape of a
child next door? Rest tranquil, _chérie_; I shall arrive.”

There was a great noise of shouting and cheering in the street at that
moment. Lucie ran to the window to see. “Come, Paulette,” she cried.
“Something is going on. A victory! Yes, it is a victory! Don’t you hear
them shouting: ‘_Vive la France_,’ and ‘_Vive Joffre_’? Let us go down
and see.”

“_Bien_,” responded Paulette laconically, putting up her knitting.

So, down the gloomy stairway they went to the street, where people were
gathered in knots, all talking, exclaiming. “Is it then a victory at
last?” inquired Paulette.

“A victory indeed,” the nearest woman told her. “They have driven those
Boches across the Marne. We are safe.”

Paulette looked down at Lucie, who was eagerly listening, “If those
silly donkeys of women had but waited another day,” she said, “I would
still be holding my job.”

“They will come back, perhaps, when they know.”

“Not they. They have hearts of chickens, rabbits, those two.”

Nevertheless the news of the victory of the Marne did encourage the
good woman and she started out the next morning declaring that good
luck was with them and that she would come back with work to do. It was
very late when she did return, weary and with downcast countenance. She
shook her head when Lucie asked what success. “They are so many, these
refugees,” she said, “and all must be fed, must have employment. In
that St. Sulpice it is like a village, and one meets groups of them on
the street with a look as of those lost. So many, so many, and we are
also refugees. One more day of this and I go to the country. I care not
where. I can work in the fields.”

But the next day she came home with better reports. She had found work,
but it would keep her all day, and what would Lucie do?

“I shall have Odette and we can manage,” declared Lucie sturdily. “She
can teach me how to cook and I can then have the meal ready when you
come.”

“Tst! Tst!” cried Paulette. “Two children instead of one to set the
house on fire.”

“But Odette, she is very clever, as clever as a woman. I can tell that.
I wish you could see what she has been doing to-day. Wait, I will ask
her to show you.” She ran off to bring in the little neighbor, who
came, work in hand. “Look at this,” cried Lucie, taking it from her.

Paulette received into her hand a white satin shoe. She looked at it
contemptuously. “Is mademoiselle then attending a ball?” she asked
sarcastically.

Odette handed her the mate to the shoe; this she was covering neatly
with black cloth. “I needed shoes,” she said. “There was but this pair
at the _ouvroir_, but Mademoiselle said I could have them. I think she
too wondered what I would do with them. I shall wear them and show her.
She will be surprised, that young American lady. The cloth I begged
from the bag of the old lady who is friend of my aunt.”

“Is she not clever?” said Lucie.

“She will do,” responded Paulette, but after this no more was said
of fire due to carelessness on Odette’s part, and the next morning
Paulette started forth to work. It was in a laundry and she did not
like it, but never a word did she say to Lucie about that.

So the days went by, and Lucie learned a great many things. Odette
taught her to make an excellent _potage_, though more often it was a
_soupe maigre_ which they were obliged to have. Paulette took a modest
lunch with her, for she did not get back till night, and the two little
girls had their meal together. Paulette arranged that they should go to
market with Mathilde, under whose instructions Lucie became an expert
buyer, and although she was always busy she was the happier for it.

At night the streets were dark; there was no rattle of omnibuses, no
shops open, window curtains drawn, even the street cars darkened by
blinds. It was not like the Paris of which Lucie had dreamed in those
early days.

Out of this darkness one evening came a welcome visitor. It was Pom Pom
who first recognized the step on the stair. He sniffed at the crack of
the door, then began to whine excitedly, running first to Lucie and
then to Paulette, imploring in his language to be let out.

“What in the world is the matter with the little beast?” said Paulette.

“Shall I let him out?”

“No; it is a stray cat which has come in, no doubt. He does not like
stray cats; he is clever, however, and recognizes friends. He never
disturbs that big cat of Mathilde.”

“He certainly is making a great fuss,” remarked Lucie as Pom Pom became
more and more frantic. “Ah, there is a knock at the door; it is a
person and not a cat. Shall I go?”

“Not at all. I will go.” Although she was quite ready to scold Lucie,
when she thought occasion required, and the two lived as equals,
Paulette never forgot the proprieties when necessary. It was her place
to go to the door, and she went. For a moment she started at the
soldier standing there in his red trousers and blue coat. The light was
dim and until he spoke she did not recognize him. “Monsieur Victor!”
she then cried.

Then Lucie, who had vainly tried to hold Pom Pom, sprang to her feet,
but she could not outdistance the little dog, who seemed to reach his
master at one bound.

“I am right, then,” said Victor’s hearty voice. “There would be no
mistaking Pom Pom even if I saw no one else. How are you, Paulette? How
is Mlle. Lucie? _Ciel!_ but I have had a time finding you!”

“And how did you find us?” asked Lucie, giving him both hands while he
kissed her on either cheek.

“Through our good friend, Mons. Carriere. You know the Germans were
driven from his village and when we entered I looked him up. He told
me that he had directed you to a certain hotel, the name of which I
stowed away in my memory. I found it closed, but I learned where I
should find the family of the former proprietor; he, poor fellow, has
been killed on the front.”

“Oh!” exclaimed Lucie. “The poor old father, and little André, I am so
sorry for them.”

“Yes, yes, of course,” said Victor hastily. “So then I learned your
address and came to find you.”

“But have you received none of my letters?” asked Lucie.

“Not one.”

“How unfortunate! Then I suppose one may believe that none of my
letters have reached their destinations, those to my father, my mother,
Annette. To my dear grandfather I could not write because I do not know
where he is. That is the thing I wish first to know, Victor. Have you
heard anything of my grandfather? Mons. Carriere might have learned
something. Did you ask him?”

“I asked, yes.” Victor cast a hasty glance at Paulette, who answered
by lifting her eyebrows and compressing her lips, but she said not a
word. “You know that all those towns beyond there were occupied by the
Germans, all that country, in fact.”

“Yes, I know that, but it is not so now, and if he had been there he
could have left when the Germans retreated.”

“To be sure.” Victor looked down helplessly, picked up Pom Pom, put him
down, got up and walked to the window, where he stood without saying
anything.

“Well?” said Lucie at last. “Why don’t you go on, Victor?” she added in
a panic. “What is it? What have you heard?”

“You know they shelled those towns,” said Victor at last, his back
still turned.

“Yes, yes, I know. Poor grandfather, he was hurt! I see. Tell me, tell
me. He lies somewhere wounded, suffering.”

Victor turned around, came close and took her two hands in his. “He is
not suffering now, little Lucie,” he said gently.

Lucie looked at him wildly for a moment, then she understood. She
buried her face in her hands for a moment, then she ran sobbing to
Paulette to hide her face on the good woman’s shoulder. “He is dead,
grandfather is dead!” she faltered. “Oh, this cruel, cruel war, will it
take everything from us?”

“Courage, little one, courage,” whispered Paulette, patting her softly.
“He was not young, the dear man. His time had come and the good God
took him.”

“Tell me,” said Lucie, turning her streaming eyes upon Victor. “Tell me
all.”

“This Gustave Foucher in whose cart your grandfather traveled, turned
aside, as you already know, but, poor man, he turned the wrong way,
for soon he found himself in the midst of bombardment. He could not go
on; he could not go back. The Germans were in possession, shells were
bursting, bombs falling. In hurrying to shelter your grandfather was
struck by shrapnel. He lived on a few minutes. A quick death and an
easy one.”

“And how did you learn this, Mons. Victor?” asked Paulette.

“I inquired in every town through which I passed, and at last I was
told by those remaining in the town. They remembered Foucher quite
well, and the old man who came with him and who was killed.”

“And Gustave?”

“Was sent into Germany by the Boches.”

Lucie, who had recovered from her first violent fit of crying, said
quietly, “I would rather my grandfather should die than be sent into
Germany.”

“One is not necessarily ill treated,” said Victor. “He would be made to
work, and he would not feast on the fat of the land, to be sure.”

“And I suppose those Boches had the benefit of our basket of food that
was in the cart,” said Paulette, turning to Lucie.

Sad as the occasion was, Victor could not withstand smiling, and even
into Lucie’s eyes crept a less mournful look. It was so like Paulette
to regret the food.

“I suppose you have seen nothing of my Jean,” said Paulette, changing
the subject.

Victor shook his head. “Do you hear from him?” he asked.

“Not often. Once or twice. He was safe two weeks ago. He is a good boy,
that Jean, and when he gets his _permissionaire_ he will come to see
me, though I wish he might find me elsewhere than in Paris.”

“Then you do not like this fine city.”

Paulette flung out her hands contemptuously. “It is a den of confusion,
not so bad now, perhaps since there are fewer vehicles, but I do not
find myself at home, and I would rather work in the fields than in a
vile laundry.”

“Is that what you are doing?” Victor asked in surprise.

“One must do what one can. I do not care to beg nor to live upon
charity. It is necessary to have clothing as well as food. This moment
that child needs shoes, or will soon.”

“Does your father know of this?” Victor asked Lucie.

“My father? We have not had a word from him. In some way Paulette was
able to find out that he had been sent to a convalescent hospital in
the south. We hope my mother is with him, but we do not know. There
seems no way to find out. We do not know where to inquire about such
things.”

“This must be attended to,” exclaimed Victor. “It cannot be allowed
to go on. I will see to this myself. If your father by this time has
not returned to his duties, at least he is well enough to know what is
happening to you.”

“We did not want to worry him while he was so ill,” explained Lucie,
“and after that we did not know where to address him.”

“You could have found out.”

“Where?”

Victor shrugged his shoulders in despair. The helplessness of the girl,
the ignorance of the peasant woman, who was also proud and suspicious,
was really pitiful. Of Lucie’s father he felt sure he could get a
report. Of her mother he had grave doubts which he did not mention.
“We shall soon get this straightened out,” he said confidently. “It is
the first matter I shall attend to. You have not noticed that I have a
promotion, Lucie, and I am much aggrieved. Do you not perceive that I
am now a corporal?”

“Really? How stupid of me not to notice, but these other things--” she
stopped to draw a long sigh. “I congratulate you, Victor. How did you
win your stripe?”

“Oh, never mind; it was a little matter not worth the talking about. I
only drew attention to it that you might properly respect me. To-morrow
being Sunday I thought we might celebrate it by a little dinner. I
believe they still dine in Paris. It is fine weather. We will make a
holiday and take a walk in the gardens and have a little treat. What do
you say, Paulette? You will go?”

Paulette, pleased to be included, smiled a gracious acceptance, at the
same time knowing perfectly well that Lucie could not be allowed to go
without her, and believing it would be a good thing to divert the child
at this particular time.

“And Annette, you hear from Annette? That is another person who does
not answer my letters,” said Lucie.

“Ah, yes, Annette, of course. She is safe, out of the danger zone, but
not in the place she expected to be, for that ceased to be safe, and
with her grandparents she has gone farther off.”

“So, of course that is why I have not heard from her.”

“I will give you her address; that much at least I can do, and I
promise I will soon have news of your father.”

“You are very comforting, Victor; you always are, even this time when
you bring me such sorrowful tidings, you comfort me, too. It is very
hard for us to have no one.”

“There is no use in complaining,” said Paulette stoically. “We have
done very well, Mons. Victor. We have not starved and we have kept a
roof over our heads, which is more than some can say. I will light you
down. One must not illuminate these days.”

“Good night, little Lucie, and keep up your courage,” said Victor.
“To-morrow we shall make a holiday, a quiet one, but still a holiday.”

After watching soldier and faithful servant grope their way down one
dim flight, by the flickering light of a candle, Lucie returned to her
room. At the foot of the stairs Paulette paused. “It is not for the
father I fear so much as the mother,” she said. “If she has been sent
to Germany, who knows? who knows?”

“That is in my mind, also, Paulette,” said Victor. “We must not let the
child know our fears. She is too young to suffer more than she must,
and that is enough. It goes to my heart to see her here in Paris when I
remember how gay and happy she was in that other place.”

“It is the will of the _bon Dieu_, and we must be patient. It is
wonderful, monsieur, how patient she has been, and how eager she is to
help. If you will believe it she can cook a meal as well as any woman.
Even I say it, and the _potage_ she can make need not be despised by
any one. She has grown in more ways than in inches.”

“I have done that myself, Paulette,” said Victor gravely. “I shall
never again be the careless lad I used to be before this war.”

“It will be so with my Jean, I suppose, if so be God spares him,” said
Paulette solemnly.

“And if not he will have a glorious record, that which belongs to one
who dies for his country,” returned Victor. “You will try to comfort
the little one, Paulette. Do not let her grieve too much for the
grandfather. I will not say how fine I think you have been in caring
for her. It will be a great consolation to her mother when she knows.”

“There is nothing to say, monsieur,” returned Paulette with dignity.
“I am doing my duty which is also my pleasure, for I love the child. I
have watched her and served her since she came into the world; it would
be a fine thing if I deserted her now.”

She opened the door and let him out into the dark and silent street,
then slowly climbed the four flights of stairs to the garret room where
Lucie sat in the darkness.




CHAPTER X

NENETTE AND RINTINTIN


It was when they came from church that Lucie and Paulette found Victor
waiting for them, “Come, come,” he said, “we must begin our day at
once.”

“We shall have to go up to get Pom Pom first,” returned Lucie. “He has
been shut up too long a time to please him as it is. It will be a happy
time for him, for he has none too much chance for being out-of-doors.”

“He knew me at once and was glad to see me, the little rascal,” said
Victor.

“He will always love you best, though I do think he loves me very
well,” said Lucie.

“I should have credited him with better sense,” responded Victor.

“Because of his loving me very well?” asked Lucie mischievously.

“Not at all, but because you think he loves me more. However, I do not
admit that.”

Lucie laughed teasingly. She had lain awake a long time the night
before, full of trouble and forebodings. She mourned her grandfather
sincerely, but she was very young; she had become accustomed to
thinking of him as apart from her daily life, therefore she did not
miss him as she once would have done. Moreover, the promise of a day of
pleasure could but cheer her up, as Victor intended it should do.

She ran upstairs, and presently Pom Pom came dashing down in a perfect
turmoil of excitement, the more violent when he beheld Victor. “If I
were something smaller he would eat me up,” declared Victor, trying to
evade Pom Pom’s lavish bestowal of kisses. “Do you then take me for a
lump of meat, Pom Pom?”

At last the dog’s ecstasies were diminished and Victor gave himself up
to planning for the day’s outing. “What do you say to a little trip on
the river? We may not find it possible to go very far, but a little
way is not out of the question. I have a comrade who lives at Auteuil.
I have promised to take word of him to his people. Would this plan be
agreeable to you, Lucie, and you, Paulette?”

“I should adore it,” declared Lucie. “Isn’t it a delightful idea,
Paulette?”

In her heart of hearts Paulette was not so sure. She had never in all
her life had the experience of a trip on the water, but if Lucie wanted
it, be it far from her to object, so she said in the most indifferent
way: “It is all one to me. Suit yourselves and I shall be suited.”

Down to the river they went to board one of the small steamers plying
none too frequently between Charenton and Auteuil. On the way Victor
stopped to buy a newspaper and some sweet chocolate, which latter he
might not have been able to get but for the fact that he was a _poilu_
to whom nothing was to be denied. He handed it to Lucie, who accepted
as gratefully as any girl would who had not tasted chocolate in any
form for months. Paulette seated herself gingerly. She was armed
with the green umbrella, explaining that no one knew when it might
rain. She balanced herself on the seat as if momentarily one might
expect to be tipped over in one direction or the other, but she soon
became accustomed to the easy motion of the steamboat and entertained
herself by looking at the other passengers. There was quite a number
of soldiers with their sweethearts, a few country people, a couple of
nuns, a priest or two.

“At Auteuil we shall take our first meal,” announced Victor.

“I suppose you know where to go,” returned Paulette.

“Oh, yes,” he answered serenely. “I know; it is one reason why we
go. These parents of my comrade, it is they who keep a small inn. I
tell myself that it is a good policy to go there for we shall be well
treated without doubt.”

“Ah-h,” breathed Paulette with satisfaction. “That was a clever idea,
monsieur.”

“So I told myself. I said I will go there first because Honoré wishes
me to; second, because we shall probably fare better there than
anywhere else.”

“Ah-h,” breathed Paulette again. “It is well that those two reasons
fitted so conveniently, monsieur.”

Victor laughed, opened his newspaper and began reading bits of news to
Lucie. Pom Pom lay on the seat between them, gazing with fascinated
eyes at these new scenes through which he was passing.

At last came their landing place, and they went ashore. Victor led the
way through this and that street till they stopped before a small inn
set in a garden. It bore a sign which set forth the fact that this was
the restaurant Honoré, kept by one Pierre Blondot. Victor went in, the
others following. A gray-haired man came forward. “Do I address the
father of my comrade Honoré Blondot?” said Victor in his best manner.

“_Mon Dieu!_” cried the man, “you are the friend of our boy? He is
well? You bear no bad news?”

“He is very well, and I promised to come and tell you this with my own
lips. In passing I will say also that I have brought these ladies to
have breakfast in your so charming establishment, of whose merits I
have heard many times from my friend Honoré.”

“_Bien, bien!_ That is very well, as it should be. I welcome you and
your friends. Marie, Marie, come at once. Here is a pleasant surprise
for us. It is my wife that I call, my friends. It is the mother of
Honoré who is coming.”

A stout, trim, little dumpling of a woman came bustling forward. “What
is this? What is this, Pierre?”

Swelling with importance the good host with a wave of the hands
included the guests. “This monsieur, Marie, what think you? he arrives
on his _permissionaire_, is it not so, monsieur? He comes direct to us
with a message from our son, his comrade. Is this not a fine thing,
that he comes to us?”

“Oh, monsieur, you have seen him, you know him? The little one, he
remembered to send us a message. He is well? He is not unhappy?”

“He is very well, madame, and he is quite content. We are all content
after the victory. Paris is saved.”

“I will so embrace you, monsieur, for it is you with the others who
have done this great thing,” said mine host tearfully, as he laid his
big hands on Victor’s shoulders and kissed him on each cheek. “I give
you my thanks, my child.”

“Ah, but monsieur, madame, I have done nothing. I am but a very small
atom,” protested Victor.

“Without the atoms there could not be a thing entire,” said their
host. “But, Marie, we are forgetting the ladies. A thousand pardons,
mademoiselle, madame. I beg you will come in and be seated. Breakfast,
Marie, and the best, the best.”

At these words Victor turned to give Paulette a sly wink, while she,
quite embarrassed at being one of the party at table, and wondering if
she would be spared committing a lapse in table manners, seated herself
in the place indicated by Pierre.

There were no other guests and the whole establishment seemed to be run
by the goodman and his wife, a fact which Lucie noted and whispered to
Paulette.

“So much the better,” she returned; “the meal will probably be better
cooked and better served,” as indeed it was.

After days of frugality it was indeed a treat to partake of a tasty
soup, omelette of the freshest of eggs, chicken of the tenderest,
grapes and pears just gathered. “I regret that the coffee is not up to
the mark,” complained Pierre, who himself waited on them, “but what can
you expect? _C’est la guerre._”

Madame came from the kitchen rather flushed and embarrassed to ask
timidly if Victor could find place in his luggage for a small package
which she wished to send to her son. “It is but one pair of socks and
another little thing,” she explained.

“I can find room for a dozen pairs of socks,” he responded heartily,
“and would be glad to carry that many.”

“But no, monsieur, that would not be possible,” returned Madame. “One
pair is all I have ready,” at which innocent reply Victor laughed
heartily, rather to the discomfiture of the good little woman, who
did not see the humor of it, and to turn the subject said to Lucie:
“Perhaps mademoiselle would like to see a small thing I am sending. If
monsieur can wait till I have put up the parcel.”

Victor assured her that time was no object just then. He would walk
in the garden, smoke a cigarette, exchange views with Monsieur Pierre
who perhaps would like to ask intimate questions about his son. Madame
beckoned to Lucie who went off with her to an inner room. From a drawer
Madame drew forth the socks and a little box which she opened and
handed to Lucie to examine.

“And what are these?” asked Lucie as she held up two queer little
figures, two or three inches long.

Madame smiled. “Those,” she said, “are Nenette and Rintintin. I am
sending them to my son.”

Lucie regarded them with a puzzled expression. “But why--are they, does
one make any use of them?”

Madame smiled. “You do not know? I must then tell you that Nenette and
Rintintin bring good luck. They protect a _poilu_ from the Zeppelins,
from the aircraft guns and all that. One must not ask for them. They
must be bestowed voluntarily. They must not be bought. A friend must
make them. They are little creatures of good luck.”

“How delightful! I wish I could make a pair for Victor.”

“Why not?”

“I could not without a pattern. With one to imitate I think I could,
and if not my friend Odette, who is so clever, could help me.”

Madame considered the situation for a moment. She sincerely wished
to aid Lucie in her project. A happy thought came to her. “When does
monsieur return?”

“To-morrow night.”

“Then, mademoiselle, I will tell you what we will do: You will take
charge of the package. We will tell monsieur that you keep it safe for
him and you can then make your little figures, to-morrow, we will say,
return them to the parcel here, and give it to monsieur before he
leaves. I am sure you will not forget to put them in with the socks and
the so short note I am about to write.”

“Oh, madame, how very kind!” cried Lucie. “I will take the utmost care,
I assure you, and will not fail to do up the parcel neatly and give it
to Victor, though”--She paused suddenly and a look of disappointment
came over her face as she stood looking down at the little figures she
held.

“What is it, _chérie_?” asked Madame solicitously.

“It is this, madame. I am afraid after all that I shall not be able to
make them, for you see we are refugees who have scarcely more than we
now wear. Where then would I get materials?”

“_Pauvre petite_, if that is all it is a matter soon mended. It takes
so very little, you see, and if you will allow me I shall be glad to
furnish what you may need. Should I not be permitted to do this much
for a comrade of my Honoré? It is a very small matter indeed.”

This delicate way of putting it quite eased Lucie’s mind, so she
accepted the offer as simply as possible and returned to find Paulette
taking a comfortable nap in a corner and Victor out in the garden with
Monsieur Pierre.

Victor settled the bill and the guests parted from their hosts with
many polite phrases on both sides. It was not within the limits of
Paulette’s curiosity to refrain from asking if it were not very
expensive, this meal, and they were barely out of hearing when she put
the question.

“But no,” Victor assured her. “If I were to tell you the price you
would at once establish yourself permanently at the restaurant Honoré.
It was in vain that I protested at the small price. Monsieur Pierre
insisted that it was his regular charge for a breakfast and nothing
would induce him to take a sou more. Did I think he would cheat a
friend and that friend his son’s comrade? Therefore you see there was
nothing left to say.”

“It may be his regular price,” commented Paulette shrewdly, “but I
venture to say that he has never before given this same menu.”

“Now then,” said Victor, “we have done our duty by my friend Honoré as
well as to our own appetites, there is then the next thing. Shall we go
back as we came, or shall we take the Metro after having had a walk in
the Bois which shall make us the more ready for our dinner in the city
when the time comes?”

“Another meal, Victor?” exclaimed Lucie.

“Why not? Doesn’t one dine on Sundays?”

“Yes, but not when one has had such a feast.”

“That is not the point. The point is that when I am here on leave I
intend to eat all I can, see all I can, enjoy myself to the limit of my
opportunities.”

Paulette lifted her eyebrows and gave her expressive shrug of the
shoulders. “Your opportunities must be very few, monsieur, if the
height of your enjoyment is in the society of an old peasant woman and
a little girl.”

“Would you have me spend all my time in making new acquaintances? Is
anything better than old friends? But you have not told me, Lucie,
which you prefer, the walk through the Bois or the return trip on the
river.”

Lucie looked down dubiously at her shoes now much the worse for wear.
“If my shoes will stand it I should prefer the walk, but the soles have
become very thin. You see the pair I had on when I left home gave out
before we reached Paris, and these are now the only ones I have.”

“We will try to avoid the damp places, and if we come to any path too
wet I can carry you over.”

“Monsieur!” exclaimed Paulette, quite scandalized.

“It would be quite easy for me, I can assure you,” responded Victor
imperturbably. “After the load a soldier must become accustomed to, the
burden of carrying Mademoiselle Lucie would be nothing.”

“_Coquin!_” cried Paulette, shaking her finger at him. “If any one must
lift mademoiselle it will be I.”

“Then we must try to avoid the wet places,” returned Victor.

They turned into a street which led them to the Bois de Boulogne.
Victor had provided himself with a little map which he consulted from
time to time, but in spite of it they did wander a little from their
route and actually did happen upon a moist by-path before which there
was a discussion.

Victor stooped down to examine it. “There is only one little place
where it is very wet,” he said, “and I can carry you over that, Lucie.”

“You will do nothing of the kind,” declared Paulette, bristling up. “If
mademoiselle cannot walk without getting her feet wet I will carry her.”

“And a pretty spectacle it would be,” protested Victor, “if any one
were to come along, to behold a soldier permitting a woman to do such a
thing. Are we men permitted to show no chivalry?”

“Zut!” exclaimed Paulette, snapping her fingers. “That for your
chivalry; it is all because you wish to have your own way.”

“La! La!” cried Lucie, “are you two going to spoil the day by
quarreling over me? No one shall carry me. I shall walk.”

“And get your feet wet,” grumbled Paulette.

“A happy thought!” cried Victor, whipping out his newspaper. “We will
arrange this. Step upon the paper, Lucie.” He spread the doubled paper
upon the spot, Lucie put out her little slim foot, stepped lightly and
was over without further ado. Victor picked up the paper, looked at the
footprint for a second, then with a chuckle, folded the paper, put it
back in his pocket and followed on.

Pom Pom, always in the lead, enjoyed his day quite as much as the rest,
at least he had not the somber thoughts which haunted Lucie during
every silence. To be sure these silences were not many, for the young
people chatted constantly while Pom Pom explored, dashed on ahead, lay
down to rest till the others came up, and was quite as tired a member
of the party as any when at last they stopped at a modest restaurant on
a side street.

“Another home of a comrade, Victor?” asked Lucie smiling.

“No, although the place was recommended by one. We shall not fare so
well as we did this morning, I fancy, but I have the password which
will probably serve to bring out such food as they have, and it will be
well cooked, though simple. Are you tired, Lucie, and are those shoes
entirely worn out?”

Lucie looked down at her right foot. “This one is the worst,” she
said; “the other will last, but it is unfortunate that one must have
two shoes.”

“That is one of those unpleasant truths we must face in this world,”
returned Victor, laughing. “You should be hungry after your long walk.”

“Yes, but I have walked farther,” returned Lucie, a shadow crossing her
face.

“But that is past,” said Victor cheerfully.

Lucie made no reply, but gave her attention to the soup which was now
served them, and the meal went on. It was not quite so lively as that
of the morning, for in the first place it was not so appetizing, and
they were all tired in the second place. Then, too, to-morrow would
be a working day, to which Paulette at least looked forward with no
pleasure. It promised, however, a pleasanter prospect to Lucie who
anticipated the agreeable task of fashioning a Nenette and Rintintin
for Victor. She looked down at the little parcel which she had placed
on the table beside her.

“You’d better give that to me now,” said Victor.

Lucie shook her head. “No, I promised Madame I would take charge of it
till you were ready with your farewells.”

“She seems to have very little confidence in me,” remarked Victor.

“It might be for that reason or it might be for some other,” returned
Lucie mysteriously.

“Are you inviting me to guess?”

“Perhaps--but no, I do not wish you to. If there is another reason I
will tell you when you come to go.”

“More and more mysterious. Very well, you must not forget to tell me.”

Lucie knew that this was not likely. She held fast to the little parcel
all the way home, and could scarcely wait to show the tiny figures to
Odette after Victor had left. “You will help me, Odette?”

“To be sure, and perhaps I can make a pair, too. There might be a
soldier to whom I could give them,” Odette returned. “To be sure I know
of no one now, but he might come my way, and it is just as well to be
prepared.” She laughed gleefully.

Lucie was very impatient till the morning’s work was out of the way,
Paulette off for the day, and Odette ready to sit down with her. “It is
like playing with dolls again, isn’t it?” she said.

“But it is much more to the purpose,” declared Odette, sorting out the
materials.

“There appears to be quite enough for two sets,” said Lucie, “so we can
divide, which will be very nice. You can have half to pay for helping
me.”

“But you might want another pair, for your father, for instance.”

Lucie had not thought of this, and was not quite sure whether her
father would be frivolous enough to appreciate the attention. She
considered the matter while Odette busied herself in selecting what was
needed for Nenette and what for Rintintin. After a moment she looked
up, bunching the stuffs in her nimble little fingers. “These will be
more than enough,” she decided. “I think with economy one could get out
another couple.”

“That would be fine,” cried Lucie, “so let us begin. How should one do
it?”

Odette deftly started to pucker the stuff into shape, and before long
Nenette was called into existence, then Rintintin was soon in condition
to be given his name.

“Aren’t they precious?” exclaimed Lucie, dangling them before her. “I
shall really get too fond of them and shall want to keep them. It is
just as well that Victor is going to-night or I might be tempted.”

“We will make the others and can keep at least one couple.”

“Until your soldier appears and then they must be given up. I shall
send mine to papa at once. We must show them to Paulette. Shall you let
your aunt see yours?”

“She would not be interested.”

Lucie hesitated before she asked a question which was on the end of her
tongue, but at last she did say: “This aunt, Odette, is she kind to
you?”

“She does not beat me,” replied Odette with a little wry smile, “and I
am grateful to her for letting me stay with her when I was left with
no one. I think that perhaps she is sorry that she allowed me, for it
is very hard to find food for all. The ladies pay me for knitting the
socks, but there is not any too much of that work to do, and I wish I
might go back to the country. I am strong enough to work in the fields
and it would be better than this.”

“That is what Paulette says. I wish, myself, that we were all there.
Look at this second Rintintin, Odette. Isn’t he a droll fellow; I think
I like him better than the first.”

In due course of time the freakish little figures were finished. Odette
carried hers away. Lucie danced hers before the eyes of Pom Pom who
tried to snap them up, then they were put away till Paulette should
return and the business of dinner should be over.

“Aren’t they funny, Paulette?” asked Lucie as she displayed the
fantastic little creatures. “This is what Odette and I have been doing
to-day, making these.”

“Have you then gone back to playing with dolls?”

“Oh, no, no. You don’t understand. These are Nenette and Rintintin.
Madame Blondot told me of them yesterday and gave me the material for
making them. She has sent a pair to her son. One makes them, you see,
to give to a _poilu_ for good luck. They carry good fortune, Madame
said, protect from danger. They must be given voluntarily. The soldier
does not ask for them or that takes away the charm. So then, these are
for Victor and these for papa.”

Paulette examined them with interest. She was as full of superstitions
as most peasant folk. “One never can tell,” she remarked, “a little
thing that seems ridiculous, a horseshoe, for instance, brings good
luck. It is worth while not to pass by anything. I have no capacity for
making such things; if I had--”

She paused but Lucie understood that she wished that her boy might have
two of the farcical little mascots. He shall have, Lucie told herself,
remembering those Odette was keeping for some soldier. Why not Jean?

Then came Victor to make his adieux and to get the little parcel to
take to Honoré. “It seems much smaller than it did,” he said as Lucie
handed it to him.

She laughed. “And yet I have not abstracted the socks. Here also,
Victor, is something for you; Nenette and Rintintin.”

“Ah-h!” Victor took them with a pleased look. “You made them for me?”

“I made them, though Odette helped; she is so clever, you know. They
bear a charm, as perhaps you have heard. They will keep danger from
you.”

“They will do something else; they will remind me of my little friend,
Lucie, who has taken the trouble to make them for me.” He fastened them
to his coat. “I made inquiries about your father to-day and learn that
he has been removed to another place, a chateau, where he, with other
convalescents, will remain till they can return to their regiments. I
have written to him, and have asked him to communicate with you as soon
as possible. Here is his address.”

“I am glad, so glad. A thousand thanks, dear Victor, for doing this.
But my mother, my mother?”

Victor shook his head sadly. “I am sorry, but there is no news there.
But cheer up, dear little Lucie, do not look so mournful. Any day you
may have news of her. In this war surprises are what one must expect.
You will write to me and tell me how you prosper?”

“Oh, yes, and you?”

“Will do the same. I shall cherish Nenette and Rintintin as if they
were my own children. I came only to say good-by, for I must soon be
getting off.”

“It is sad that you must go.”

“But has it not been a wonderful holiday? When I get another we will
celebrate again. Adieu! Adieu! et _bon chance_!”

“_Bon chance! Bon chance!_ Victor. Adieu! Adieu!” from Lucie.

“Adieu, monsieur. _Que Dieu vous soit en aide_,” from Paulette. And
Victor was clattering down the stairs and out into the dim streets.

But the small shadow that followed him a trifle in the rear was not
cast by the bobbing forms of Nenette and Rintintin.




CHAPTER XI

A DOG AND HIS DAY


It was in the middle of the night that Lucie woke with a consciousness
of something missing. The little furry ball always curled up at her
feet was not there. She sat up in bed. “Pom Pom” she called softly,
feeling along the edge of her cot and reaching over toward the foot.
But no moist little tongue licked her hand in response. “He has gone to
Paulette,” decided Lucie, for once in a great while he took a notion
to cuddle down by the older woman. Having made up her mind that this
was the way of it Lucie snuggled down again and it was not till morning
that she discovered that Pom Pom was really gone.

“He was here last night when Victor came,” said the girl distressedly.
“You remember, Paulette, how he jumped on Victor and barked so sharply
that to stop him Victor took him in his lap.”

“He may have followed him downstairs and have been shut in--or out,”
Paulette suggested.

“Then he would be back by now scratching at the door. He has lingered
once or twice down there but always he has come back in a hurry; he
would do it now.”

“Unless some one picked him up.”

“Oh, Paulette, what a dreadful thought!” Lucie clasped her hands
agitatedly. “I will go down at once to see if Mathilde knows anything
about him.” This was no sooner said than done. Downstairs flew Lucie to
find and question Mathilde.

“But no, mademoiselle,” said Mathilde. “The little dog? Yes, yes, I
know him well. I have not seen him, nor have I heard him. If he had
come to the door I would have let him in, for I would have understood,
I, that one does not like to lose a pet. There is sorrow enough that
cannot be avoided in these days without adding anxiety over a loss of
that kind.”

“If you should see him, madame. If you will inquire of those in the
neighborhood when you have a chance. Some one may have picked him up
without knowing where he belongs.”

“If I find him I will send him up to you flying. Rest assured of that.”

This was the best that could be done and Lucie returned very miserable.
“Is it not true that troubles never come singly?” she said. “Victor
brings me sad news of my grandfather and now comes the loss of my
darling Pom Pom.”

“But Monsieur Victor also brought you good news of your father. Do not
despair so soon, little one. The day is but begun; you may have him
safe before I get home. Have you inquired of Odette?”

“No, for it seemed no use.”

“It will do no harm, for he may have scratched at our door and we may
not have heard him. I sleep heavily these days, and then he may have
gone to Odette as the next friend to rely upon. I go now, _chérie_. Do
not despond.”

She went out and Lucie followed as far as the next door, upon which she
tapped. The doors now were not locked since the two little girls had
become intimates and wished to run back and forth at will. Hearing no
response to her rap Lucie went in. Odette was sitting, elbows on window
sill, staring out into the street. It was a gray day, somber and chill,
for winter was at hand. “Have you seen Pom Pom?” Lucie made her query
without further delay.

“Pom Pom? No, why, have you lost him?”

Lucie dropped down on the floor and covered her face with her hands.
“He is gone, gone, the dear little dog whom I loved so well, and, whom
I promised to take good care of.”

“When did you see him last?”

“When Victor was here last evening. He was so overjoyed when Victor
arrived. You never saw such delight. Paulette thinks he may have
followed Victor downstairs, but of course Victor would have sent him
back.”

“If he saw him. This is what I think; that he followed your friend to
the street. Monsieur sent him back. He returned to find the door shut.”

“He would have waited there till morning unless some one picked him up.
Oh, Odette, I have lost him, lost him, and now I no more have a dear
little dog to love me and to love.”

“But you have others; me, I have no one, not even a dog to love or to
love me.”

Lucie looked up through her tears. “But Odette, I love you.”

Odette smiled rather sadly. “Not as you do Pom Pom. You would not
weep if you were to lose me out of your days. Don’t cry, Lucie. Let
us go out and look for him. This is such an unusual occasion that I
think we need not ask permission. We will need to go only around the
neighborhood.”

It was a comfort to Lucie that she could make some active effort toward
looking for the little dog, but though they went from dairy to bakery,
from bakery to butcher shop, and so on the rounds no one had seen or
heard anything of the lost Pom Pom. So they returned quite hopeless and
discouraged, and Lucie spent a melancholy day.

Odette tried to comfort her as best she could, succeeding in making her
laugh more than once, though immediately she would lapse into a fit of
weeping. “I shouldn’t care so much if I could know he would be well
cared for,” she mourned. “A little dumb beast is so helpless; he cannot
tell his troubles if he is neglected and ill treated. He has never
known anything but kindness.”

“Then he is better off than many human beings,” returned Odette
somberly.

Lucie looked at her through her tears. “Odette, are you ill treated?”
she asked.

“I suppose one should not mind harsh words, and should not call oneself
ill treated who has nothing more than that, but, you see, even your dog
wanted affection, and you are mourning because you think he has none,
or, perhaps, has none, while I--there is not a soul on earth to give me
a word of love, much less a caress.”

Lucie moved close up to her and put her arms tightly around her. “My
little Odette,” she whispered, “my dear Odette whom I love. I shall
miss my dear dog, but I am thankful that I have you, my friend.”

“Lucie, Lucie,” murmured Odette, “you do not know how I love you, how I
have longed to have you love me. I am only a little peasant girl, but I
can be faithful and true. Do you know that many times when I have seen
you fondling your dog I have wished that I, too, were a dog, for then
some one might be as good to me as you were to Pom Pom.”

“That seems very sad,” returned Lucie, “but it is better to be a friend
than a dog, and that you are and always will be. Do you know what I
think, Odette? I think when this war is over that it would be a fine
thing for you to go back with us to our town. We must see about that. I
shall talk of it to Paulette who already likes you so much. She is not
one to take fancies, but she has said to me: ‘She is a bright one, that
Odette. With a little training and experience she will do well,’ and
that is a great deal for Paulette to say, for she is very chary of her
praise.”

“This may be a sad day for you, Lucie, but it is a very happy one for
me, or would be if you were not so miserable.”

“I shall try not to be miserable, for who knows what may happen before
the day is out? That is what my mother used to tell me. So bright and
cheerful, such a sunny nature, mother had. I think, Odette, that all
other sorrow would seem as nothing if I could see her again. Even if I
knew her to be safe and well, I could be cheerful.”

“I can understand that,” Odette agreed. “That day may come, and sooner
than you expect.”

It seemed that Odette was a true prophet, for that very evening the
clouds began to break away for Lucie. “Well, mademoiselle,” said
Paulette when she came in, “who is sending you presents? Here is a
letter too.”

“But alas, no news of Pom Pom,” returned Lucie.

“I do not yet despair. He may be shut up somewhere and will come to us
fast enough when he is free.”

This sounded encouraging, so Lucie opened her letter. “It is from
Victor,” she announced, beginning to read.

“Humph!” exclaimed Paulette. “He loses no time.”

Lucie paid no attention to this; she was eagerly reading the page
before her. “Paulette, Paulette,” she cried suddenly, “listen to this.
Oh, that bad Pom Pom!”

Paulette dropped the soup ladle-back into the kettle. “_Mon Dieu!_” she
cried. “What is this about Pom Pom?”

“Listen and I will read about that ungrateful little one. This is what
Victor writes: ‘Dear Lucie: The train is about to start but before it
goes I must tell you that Pom Pom is here and that I shall have to take
him with me as there is no time to return him to you. The boys will be
happy to receive him as a mascot, and I hope no harm will come to him.
I know you will miss him, but if we come out of this safely you shall
have him again. _Au revoir._ Victor. P.S. Nenette and Rintintin send
their respectful greetings. That little rascal Pom Pom followed me
all the way, but I did not discover it till too late, for he kept well
behind me. V.’ Did you ever know a dog so clever? He knew perfectly
well that he should not go with Victor, but it is as I said on Sunday;
he loves Victor best, for he was his first beloved. That is constancy
for you.”

“There is no friend more faithful than a dog,” returned Paulette,
beginning again to dip out the soup.

“We shall miss him,” said Lucie sadly, “but I am sure he felt that he
owed his first duty to his master. I was a second consideration. Very
well, that must be accepted. I am glad to know that at least he is in
good hands. I must tell Odette.”

“Take your soup first.”

“It is very hot and I will not stay a minute.”

“I know the minutes of maidens,” grumbled Paulette.

But Lucie was not to be deterred, and went off, her minute truly
lengthening to five. Paulette, however, in spite of her grumbling,
poured her bowl of soup back into the pot where it kept hot for her.

“I should like to open the parcel,” said Lucie between spoonfuls of
soup. “I haven’t the least idea what it is, have you, Paulette?”

“Not I.”

“But who could have sent it? What is it like? Did you feel it?”

Paulette smiled. “Such curiosity. It feels like a box, or, no, like
something hard. One does not get many boxes these days. _C’est la
guerre._”

“Are you sure it is for me?”

“There is the name, the street, the number, even the floor. Madame
Mathilde gave it to me with the letter as I came in.”

“If I were not so hungry I would open it directly. Do you think this a
pretty good soup, Paulette?”

“Not so bad.”

“Will not mamma be surprised when she learns how I can cook a meal all
by myself?”

Paulette was silent.

“Oh, I know what you are thinking; you do not believe that we shall see
mamma again.”

“I said nothing.”

“No, but I know that look which means so much. I was very doubtful
myself before this news of Pom Pom. I have been so unhappy all day,
Paulette, and but for Odette I think I should have died. What should I
do without Odette when I have no more a Pom Pom?”

“It is a great satisfaction to me that you have some one to keep you
company while I must be away.”

“And some one of whom you approve, for you do approve of her, don’t
you? Of course she is not of Annette’s class, but she is a dear, fine
girl and I shall love her always and keep her as my friend. When mamma
knows her she will not object, I am sure.”

“You are speaking very often of your mamma this evening.”

“Yes, because something tells me that I shall see her again. That
report of papa which Victor gave us has somehow given me a feeling of
being nearer to my parents. For a time I felt as if I had none. Now I
feel that I have.”

“Heaven grant that it may be so,” responded Paulette piously as she
rose from the frugal meal and began to clear the table.

It was a scantily furnished, poor little place, two rooms and a queer
sort of kitchenette contrived from a dark closet where a sink and
running water were established, together with a tiny stove. It was
already a problem how they were to be kept warm in winter. The larger
of the two rooms held Paulette’s cot, three chairs, a table, and a set
of shelves which served as cupboard. In Lucie’s room was her cot with
one chair and an iron washstand over which hung a small mirror. The
floors were uncovered and the only household utensils were those which
had been brought from the old home in that basket which was retained
instead of the one containing food. More than once Paulette and her
charge had congratulated themselves that it was this instead of the
other basket.

“The food would have been eaten long ago,” Paulette declared, “but look
what remains.”

The matter of clearing away did not occupy many minutes and then Lucie
opened her package. It was done up firmly, but with not more paper than
barely necessary, so it was almost at once that Lucie saw the contents.
“Of all things, Paulette,” she cried, “a pair of shoes! It is you who
have done this to play a joke upon me.”

“You are quite on the wrong track, my dear,” responded Paulette,
picking up one of the shoes and examining it carefully. “Even supposing
I had the will I could not have afforded shoes like these. You should
try them on.”

This Lucie did not hesitate to do, stretching out her little foot to
be admired. “Do you see, Paulette? They fit exactly, a trifle wide,
perhaps, but that is a good fault. Now who in the world could have
chosen so exactly but you? No one else but Odette could possibly know
the size, and poor Odette has no money to spend on a gift. Come,
Paulette, confess that you have done this to give me a pleasant
surprise.”

“But I tell you that I have nothing to do with it. Shall I then take
credit for a thing which I have not done? No, no, my child, it is some
other and I can guess who. I may be a stupid old pig but it does not
tax my brains to guess the giver.”

Lucie put on the other shoe and sat looking admiringly at her
outstretched feet, all the time at a loss to read a puzzle which the
older woman had so readily solved. She picked up the paper which had
come around the shoes and examined the address attentively. She shook
out the paper, then she took off the shoes and looked inside. “I cannot
guess,” she said at last.

Paulette laughed a little grimly. “This person took your measure very
correctly, nevertheless. It was a clever trick. The good heart, the
good heart of him, and the delicacy. Otherwise one could not accept,
no, of course, one could not. Now there is nothing to say. There is no
proof possible. One can only use guesswork, but that is easy enough.”

Then suddenly it dawned upon Lucie. “Victor!” she cried. “Of course
I remember now that he made me step upon the newspaper, and that the
footprint, that very muddy footprint, was quite distinct. He folded up
the paper and put it back in his pocket. I wondered a little at his
doing that.”

“One can see through a millstone,” responded Paulette. “Even I have
solved deeper riddles.”

Lucie continued to regard the shoes thoughtfully. “It is as you say,
Paulette, under different circumstances I could not accept them. Even
now it seems very strange that Victor Guerin should be giving Lucie
Du Bois a pair of shoes. I think even now I shall have to ask him
outright, and I shall not wear the shoes till I have his answer.”

Paulette nodded approbation of this proud speech. “Continue to keep
your pride as long as you can, my child,” she said. “We may have to
accept help but the moment has not come yet.”

“If it does come,” returned Lucie, “I hope I may be able to return it
in a proper way. I shall write to Victor at once.”

But before an answer could come to her letter came direct news from
her father which relieved her mind as well as Paulette’s. “You cannot
imagine, my precious child,” he wrote, “the great relief which Victor
Guerin’s letter brought me. All this time and not a word from you! My
imagination has pictured a thousand dreadful things which might have
befallen you. That you are safe and well gives me great joy, and it is
the utmost satisfaction I feel in knowing that you are with Paulette
who will take good care of you, I am sure. I have made arrangements to
have a certain sum paid you every month, and this I hope will give you
more comfort. I have nearly recovered my health and expect soon to go
back to my duties.” Then followed definite directions about the monthly
allowance, words of endearment, messages to Paulette and a promise to
write often, but the closing words, “Not a line from your mother,” were
discouraging.

Lucie could scarcely wait for Paulette to come home on the day this
letter was received, and there was great danger that the dinner would
either be spoiled or that there would be no dinner at all. A dozen
times the child ran out to see if she could catch sight of Paulette
toiling up the stairs. At last appeared the well-worn shawl, the black
handkerchief tied around the head. “Paulette, Paulette,” cried Lucie,
“come quickly. I have news, good news.”

Paulette quickened her tread and arrived quite out of breath. “Madame?
Your mother?” she panted.

“No,” Lucie caught her breath quickly, “but a letter from papa at
last. Come in and I will read it to you. How tired you are, my poor
Paulette, but never mind, you shall hear the news and that will make
you feel better.” She read the letter, interrupted by many exclamations
and comments and when she had finished she rushed over to hug the good
woman who, brave enough under misfortune, was wiping her eyes at this
good news.

“Now we need have no fear of the winter,” said Lucie excitedly. “We
shall be able to keep warm and to have more food. Will it be enough,
this money, to keep us without your working, Paulette? I do dislike
to see you coming home so worn out. You walk all the way and it is not
well for you to stay in that heated place and then come out into the
cold.”

“It is better that I walk,” protested Paulette, “for I am less liable
to take cold doing so. As for my not working, my little child, that is
not to be thought of. Better that we have more comforts than merely eke
out a subsistence. However, I can look out for something better and who
knows what chance may bring?”

“It seems as if there were no evil without some good,” remarked Lucie
reflectively. “I miss Pom Pom so very much; this morning it seemed as
if I could not endure it, then came this letter. Dear little Pom Pom, I
do hope he is well and happy. He will be if it depends upon Victor.”

“This money of which your father speaks. How does one get it? Read that
again.”

Lucie re-read the part relating to the money. “You see,” she said,
“that we have no trouble about it. Some one will bring it to us, which
is very good. I wonder how soon. I shall have to open the door to
whoever it is, Paulette.”

“I will speak to Mathilde about that. She will interrogate and if it
is a proper person there can be no objection. She has the face of a
fish and the manner of an ill-tempered goat, but she is not so bad. The
heart is there, though one must not expect always to find it.”

“She was very, very kind and interested about Pom Pom, and how she
laughed when I told her of his following Victor. ‘When one of them
wants to be a _poilu_ there is no keeping them,’ she said. I think she
is very fond of animals, more than of people.”

“Probably with good reason,” returned Paulette.

“Even though I no longer have Pom Pom I shall not be lonely to-morrow,”
remarked Lucie, “for I shall write a long letter to my father, and I
shall begin to expect a letter from Victor and to look for the person
with the money. We are having a good deal of excitement, Paulette.”

Paulette shrugged her shoulders. “Thank heaven it is not of a different
kind.”




CHAPTER XII

TERRORS BY NIGHT


Victor’s letter did not come the next day, though the person with the
money did, giving Lucie a greater surprise than even the shoes. She had
eaten her slight midday meal, consisting of a small bowl of soup left
from the dinner of the day before, and a piece of not very good bread.
She was washing the bowl and picturing to herself the sort of person
likely to be her father’s messenger, a meager little old man probably,
all the young ones had gone to the war, it seemed; this one would wear
spectacles, have thin gray hair and be a trifle deaf; he would hold
his hand back of his ear and say “_Plait-il?_” when she answered his
questions; and then came the knock at the door.

Lucie jumped. The exciting moment had arrived. She went to open, fully
prepared to see the sort of person her fancy had created, and was so
taken aback that she could hardly reply to the question: “Is this where
Mlle. Lucie Du Bois lives?” for instead of a snuffy old man there stood
a radiant, well-dressed young woman.

“I am Lucie Du Bois”; the answer came stammeringly.

“May I come in?” The young lady smiled.

“Oh, surely. I beg your pardon, but I--I--was not prepared to see a
young lady.”

“What then?” Again the lady smiled so delightfully that Lucie smiled in
return as she said: “Oh, an old man, quite an old one.”

“Then you must be disappointed.”

“O, no, quite the contrary.”

“I am Mlle. Lowndes, Nora Lowndes.”

“Then you are not French.”

“No, I am an American.”

“Then, won’t you please speak English? It has been so long since I
heard it.”

“You speak English?” Miss Lowndes looked surprised.

“But yes. I speak it, you see, because my mother is American, and would
have me speak as well as read her language.”

“How perfectly delightful. It is much easier for me, of course. Let us
begin right away. Shall I sit here? Of course you want to know about
your father first thing and then we will talk business.”

“You have seen my father? You know him?”

“Oh, yes, for I have been helping the nurses at Madame Hautecœur’s
chateau which she has given for a convalescents’ home during the war. I
have just come from there.”

“Oh, miss, you have just come? You have seen him so recently?”

“Only three days ago. He was looking much better, still a little pale
as would be expected from one so long a patient in a hospital, but
still doing very well, and soon able to go back to his regiment. You
cannot believe what that letter from the young soldier, what is his
name? did for him. He seems to have taken on new life, and I do not
wonder, all these months without a word of his wife and daughter.”

“It was this way, you see: at first Paulette would not let me write
because we were at such a pass, unhappy refugees. We were expecting
every day to meet my grandfather and that everything then would be
settled, but you see my grandfather never came. Does my father know
about this? That we shall never see dear grandfather again?”

Miss Lowndes laid her hand caressingly on Lucie’s. “Yes, dear child, he
knows; your friend told him in his letter.”

“That was kind, but it was like Victor to do it. He would know that it
might be hard for me to tell my father.”

Miss Lowndes nodded. “I like that Victor. And so you did not write to
your father at all?”

“Not at first, but after a while, but it seems he did not get the
letter. Then we found that he had been moved to another hospital and
did not know where to write. You see, mademoiselle, Miss I mean--”

Miss Lowndes smiled. “That isn’t the way we say it, dear. We would say
Miss Lowndes, or just go on talking without saying Miss anything.”

“I am forgetting some of my English, I am afraid. You see, Miss
Lowndes, Paulette, she is the old peasant woman who took care of me
when I was a baby, and who has always lived with us. Paulette is so
lost here in Paris, and I am a very ignorant little girl. Neither of us
knew where to go to find out about things; Paulette would be afraid,
anyway, for she has a great fear of governments and officials, and but
for Victor I do not know when we should have heard about papa.”

“And who is this nice Victor person?”

“He is the cousin of my best friend, Annette Le Brun who lived next
door to us, at least she was my best friend; I do not know that I shall
ever see her again, but now I have Odette.”

“Tell me about Odette.”

“She is also my next door neighbor. Like myself she is a refugee, but
it is much worse for her. I have Paulette who loves me and would work
her fingers off for me, but Odette has lost her father and mother.
She has no one at all but a cross old great-aunt who wishes her off
her hands. You understand then, miss, I mean Miss Lowndes, that it is
not very happy for Odette, though since we have become friends it is
better. She is so bright, so full of courage, this Odette, that I
admire her much.”

“I must make her acquaintance, and Paulette’s, too. I know I shall love
Paulette. Now to business. In this envelope is a sum of money which
your father sends. I am sure you must need it, for I really don’t see
how you have managed all this time.”

“Paulette had her savings, you see, and then for a time she had good
work in two families as _femme de ménage_. They have left the city,
unfortunately, and now poor Paulette works in a laundry where she gets
small pay, but it is much better than nothing.”

“Dear Paulette, what a treasure she must be. Now, then, this is
not your allotment to which, as the daughter of a captain, you are
entitled. I shall see to your getting that, but your father wishes that
you have this, too, every month, and I shall see that you receive it,
that is, so long as I am in the city and you are here, too.”

“Paulette is always talking of going to the country where she can work
in the fields, which she would like much better than what she is doing.”

“I don’t blame her. We shall have to talk about that later on. I am
working with the Committee for Devastated France, and shall be here
until I am sent elsewhere. Now, dear child, if there is anything I can
do I want you to be sure to let me know. I want you to feel that you
have a friend, a countrywoman of your mother, whom you can turn to at
any time. I will give you a card with the address which will always
find me.”

“My mother, I don’t suppose my father has heard anything of her,” said
Lucie wistfully. “Has he any idea where she is?”

“I am afraid not. We think she must be in one of the towns behind the
German lines, so of course she cannot communicate with her people.
There is no reason to believe she is not safe. We are all making every
effort to get news of her but so far have not succeeded. You shall know
the very instant we do hear anything. Let me see, I suppose Sunday
would be the best day for seeing Paulette, and Odette, too. Of course
you, dear child, are to look upon me as a friend, but I want to find
out things that can be done for any refugee, and this little Odette,
I want to learn more about her. I cannot stop now, but Sunday I shall
see you again, and please call me Miss Nora, it sounds so much more
friendly.” She stooped to give Lucie a kiss and went off casting a
bright glance over her shoulder as she went out.

Lucie lost no time in hunting up Odette. This most wonderful thing must
be talked over at once, then, when that was discussed from every side,
there was the long letter to her father to be written, so that the
afternoon was all too short, and Paulette came near finding no dinner
ready when she arrived.

Lucie showed her the money triumphantly, saying: “And now you will not
have to go to that old laundry any more.”

But Paulette was entirely too canny to agree to this. “Why should I
not?” she asked. “Am I then to throw away good money merely that I may
sit with my hands folded? I shall work while I am able, for the winter
at least, and in the spring we shall see what we shall see.”

The next pleasant thing to happen was the Sunday visit of Miss Lowndes,
who made herself so agreeable that even Paulette, chary of praise at
most times, declared her a “young lady of parts.” Following this event
came the letter from Victor. An amusing letter it was, of rollicking
nonsense, and giving no hint of discomfort or discouragement.

“About those shoes,” he wrote, “I am very glad they were left at your
door. I think Pom Pom must have sent them, at least when I asked him
about them and charged him with being the giver he did not deny it, but
looked very conscious, and from his expression I should surmise that he
knows more than he chooses to tell. Very pretty of him, wasn’t it, to
send you a parting gift? By the way, he has captured all hearts, if he
has not yet captured a Boche, but we all expect such great things of
him that there is no telling what I shall have to report when I next
see you.”

In consequence, so far as the shoes were concerned, Lucie was no wiser
than before, and concluded that whatever Victor might know he did not
mean to tell; therefore, Paulette advised her to accept the situation
and wear the shoes, which she did.

So the weeks wore on. Autumn slipped into winter. Christmas came and
went, rather a sorrowful day for all in spite of an effort on the
part of every one to make it bright and cheerful. Miss Lowndes came
with little gifts for Paulette and Lucie, and a basketful of food for
the old women next door, but no one felt very gay; memories were too
poignant.

But the New Year brought two bright occurrences. Jean had his first
permission, granted every four months to the men in the trenches, but
somehow a little delayed in his case. Paulette took a week’s holiday
and undertook to show her son the city, with Lucie and Odette as two of
the party. Big, honest Jean was rather shy before Lucie, whom he knew
only as the young lady of his former employer’s family, but he was more
at home with Odette, who presented him with Nenette and Rintintin to
his delight and Paulette’s satisfaction. It was while he was still on
leave and was making his daily visit to his mother that news came from
Captain Du Bois, news that made Lucie happier than any gift, for he
wrote that he had had a message from her mother, a mysteriously sent
message, believed to have been smuggled in by some one through the
German lines. At all events there was no inkling of how it was sent.
The words: “I am safe and well,” were all the message contained but
they were enough to cheer Lucie and her father.

“Nothing, no New Year’s gift, could have made me so happy,” Lucie told
Miss Lowndes who had come in that very day. “Perhaps next year the war
will be over and we shall be together again in our home.”

“I would not expect too much, dear,” said Miss Lowndes, “though now
I think you may hope to see your mother again.” And this hope buoyed
Lucie up in many of the tragic days to come.

After Jean’s departure Paulette went back to her work, but because of
her son’s insistence she shortened her hours and reached home while it
was still daylight. “I shall not have a happy moment if I know you are
out after dark,” he said. “With those Zeppelins about I shall not be
satisfied to have you exposed at night.”

“But they may come in daylight, and one is not safe in one’s own home,”
protested Paulette.

“Just the same I shall not be satisfied,” returned Jean doggedly, and
Paulette yielded.

Perhaps it was just as well that she did, for along in March came a
disaster which, literally, struck near home, and which affected each
one of the little group occupying the rooms overlooking the old convent
garden. It was poor old Amelie Durand who was the victim. She was
coming home when the Zeppelin swooped down upon Paris to do its deadly
work, and with others she was killed. Lucie, trembling and terrified at
the news, cowered in a corner of her room till Paulette should come.
In the next room, Odette, pale and shivering, but outwardly calm, did
what she was told to do. She had no great love for this aunt of hers,
old Amelie Durand, but she was her nearest of kin and this stroke of
fate seemed even more ghastly than the others which had taken the ones
most beloved. It was a time of fear, of dread, of confusion. Curious
visitors came and went. There were footsteps on the stairs going up or
down all day long. Officials of the government came to investigate. Old
Henriette Jacquet, Amelie’s friend and companion, worked up to a state
of excitement which made her ill, talked incessantly in a shrill, high
key, to any one and every one who came in.

Lucie, who heard and saw most of all this, felt as if she were in worse
case than upon that dreadful journey to the city. She started at every
sound, dreading that she would next hear the threatening hum of another
Zeppelin. Paulette listened to the tale of the disaster with set lips
and lowering brows. “And I said I would not work in a munition factory,
because of the danger,” she said nodding meditatively. “Where is one
safe these days, surely not here in Paris. If those Boches can get here
once, they can again.” She did not go out the next day, but she spent
much time with old Henriette while Odette stayed with Lucie.

One morning Odette announced that Henriette had declared that she would
not remain another week in the city. She had relatives near Poitiers
and to them she would go.

“And what will you do, Odette?” asked Lucie with concern. This question
had been in her mind ever since Amelie’s death.

“I do not know,” Odette answered after a moment. “I think I shall go
into a munition factory. One can get work very easily, they tell me.”

“Oh, but Odette, I don’t want you to go into a munition factory. I am
afraid you will be killed.”

“One may as well be killed that way as by a Zeppelin, and the pay is
excellent.”

“Do you want to go, Odette?”

Odette looked at her with an inscrutable smile. “Has that anything to
do with it? I place myself in danger, perhaps, but so do our soldiers
and do they hesitate? I shall be helping France.”

“To be sure, but there are other ways of helping.”

“How and where?”

“In the fields. They say help is needed there for planting the crops.
We shall need all the food we can get, and it seems to me that I should
prefer that kind of work.”

“I should prefer it, but I do not know where to go or how to get there
when I do know.”

“We can ask Miss Lowndes. I am sure she can tell us. Please, Odette,
promise me that you will do nothing till I find out from Miss Lowndes.”

“And in the meantime am I to accept charity from Henriette Jacquet? No,
I thank you. She has endured me simply because of my aunt. She will be
leaving in a few days at the most.”

Lucie sat silent and troubled. She would like to have said at once that
Odette must come in with Paulette and herself, but she was not sure how
Paulette would regard such an arrangement, and Paulette could speak her
mind most positively when she wished, without regard to those concerned.

However, as if Paulette had read her mind she presently appeared from
next door. “Well, my child,” she began, “I do not intend to stay here
to be annihilated by those Boches. Enough of the city for me. We go.
We go to the fields, to the trees, the good earth. For me I have no
regrets.”

“When, when do we go?” asked Lucie eagerly.

“As soon as I learn some things that must be learned,” responded
Paulette oracularly. “In the meantime we prepare. You will not be
_triste_, you, to go?”

“I shall regret nothing but leaving Odette.”

“There is nothing to regret there,” said Paulette serenely, “for she
goes with us.”

Odette sprang to her feet and threw her arms around Paulette. “I? It
is I, Odette Moreau, that you mean? I do not then work in the munition
factory among strangers, but I shall be with you, madame, and my Lucie?”

“Why not?” returned Paulette. “Have you so many relatives that you
cannot go with us? I have settled it all with this Henriette Jacquet,
the stupid.” She did not explain why this epithet, but Odette had
reason to believe that Henriette had not favored the arrangement, and
that her objections were based upon a possible expense to herself.

Lucie settled herself comfortably on the arm of Paulette’s chair. “Now
tell us all about it,” she said. “You love to be mysterious, Paulette,
but this is no time for mysteries. Neither Odette nor I are in any
frame of mind to be tantalized. Just go ahead and tell us as much as
you know.”

Taken in this way Paulette was disposed to be communicative. “I have
told you that all is not ready, but so much is true that we adopt
Odette into the family. I have spoken to Mathilde. This Henriette goes.
We open the door leading from our rooms into hers. The rooms are taken
by the month, and the month is not up. We become one establishment in
this manner. By the end of the month we learn where we shall go, and
the rooms are given up.” This was quite a satisfactory report, although
Paulette did keep back the fact that Henriette was ready to go at once,
because Paulette had made it possible by paying the difference in the
rent from the present date to the end of the month.

So poor, old, worn, cross-grained Amelie Durand passed into
forgetfulness, and Henriette was not long in making her exit, leaving
no memories which in any way affected the lives of her associates in
Paris.

Neither Lucie nor Odette had known such happy days in Paris as the
next few weeks brought them. In the first place preparations included
the buying of new clothes, in which task Miss Lowndes offered to take
a hand, and which meant several visits to the big shops which neither
girl had ever seen. Paulette, too, turned to the American girl for
advice, and because her vision was clearer and her outlook broader she
was able to suggest things which had not occurred to the peasant woman.

“I should say that the first thing to do was to write to Captain Du
Bois and learn his wishes,” said Miss Lowndes.

“I agree with you,” returned Paulette, “but as I am not gifted with the
pen, mademoiselle, perhaps you will do this writing for me. You will be
able to put the case more clearly than the child, Lucie, who will be
guided by her own desires.”

“I will gladly write, for I think I know conditions pretty well. I
suppose Captain Du Bois must have relatives somewhere to whom you might
go.”

“I know of none who do not live in cities or so far away that it would
be a miserable journey to reach them, but he has friends no doubt, and
at least can advise.”

“In the meantime I will be making inquiries and it may be that a chance
will come which will be exactly what would be best.”

So the letter was written, but as it happened the chance came neither
through a suggestion of Captain Du Bois, nor through any scheme of Miss
Lowndes, and while waiting for an answer to the letter the girls and
Miss Lowndes did their shopping.

Lucie was quite ready to indulge herself in as pretty and becoming
clothes as she could afford, but Odette--who would give her credit
for so much good sense?--Odette insisted upon such things as she had
always worn, the simple dress of a little peasant. “I am to work in
the fields, mademoiselle,” she said. “How long would such a frock as
Lucie’s serve me? Again I shall be thrown with the country people and I
do not wish them to laugh at me or to think I am putting on airs.”

Miss Lowndes looked at her quite taken aback. “Did you ever!” she
exclaimed. “I did not think of that, Odette,” she said. “You are wiser
than I.” She told Paulette about it when she next saw her. The good
woman nodded approvingly. “She is clever, very clever, that Odette.”

“And if you could have seen how pretty she looked in the hat that was
tried on her.”

“No doubt, no doubt, but beauty is only skin deep, and does not earn
the bread and butter as readily as quick wit and busy hands.”

“Yet Odette is quite pretty; she has lovely eyes. She is not so good
looking as Lucie, to be sure.”

“She should not be. She is a skinny little cabbage, but she will do.
If she turns out as well as she has begun, she will not be half bad. I
shall keep my eye on her.”

Paulette spoke meditatively and Miss Lowndes wondered a little what was
in her mind. She was to discover in due course of time.




CHAPTER XIII

OLD FRIENDS AND NEW


Then suddenly appeared Victor on his second permission, and wearing a
sergeant’s stripes, won for his tact, his influence over the men, and
for his bravery during a night raid. But of this exploit he would say
nothing, merely laughing off the question when Lucie asked him how he
had earned his promotion. “I did nothing at all, nothing more than any
one would have done if he had had the same chance. They gave me my
stripes simply because of my youthful beauty.”

He came in with a rush and a dash, immediately making the whole place
seem fuller of life and action. “What’s all this I hear? What’s all
this?” he asked after the first salutations, “going away, are you?
Well, I can scarcely blame you. Where are you going?”

“We don’t know yet,” Lucie answered.

“Then I am wiser than you. I know, I know.”

“Then why did you ask?” Lucie gave his arm a little tap, making him
drop the match with which he was lighting his cigarette. “You did it
just to tease. How do you know?”

“Aha! Revenge! Revenge! I shall not tell you, because you spoiled my
light.”

“You will have to tell Paulette.”

“How do you know I will? I’m not afraid of Paulette. She is not a
Boche.”

“And are you afraid of a Boche?”

Victor laughed and took from his pocket a letter which he handed to
Paulette. “It is from Captain Du Bois,” he said.

Paulette took it with an air of importance and went to the window to
read it, a slow process with her.

“You have seen my father, then, Victor?” said Lucie. “Do tell me how he
looks.”

“Fit as a fiddle. We had a long talk and he charged me with this letter
to Paulette.”

“And have you none for me?”

“No, but I have a message from Pom Pom.”

Lucie looked wistfully over at Paulette, whose lips were moving as she
laboriously read the words before her. “I think I might see the letter,
too,” she said.

“You don’t want Pom’s message then. You don’t look interested,” said
Victor.

“Oh, I do want it, but of course I am more interested in what my father
has to say. What is Pom’s message?”

“He says to tell you that when those shoes are worn out he will send
you another pair if he has to rob a Boche to get them.”

“What nonsense! How is the dear little fellow, and why didn’t you bring
him with you?”

“I was afraid he wouldn’t want to go back, and I’d hate to have him
shot as a deserter. The boys are all devoted to him. My friend Honoré
has him in charge while I am on leave.”

“Oh, yes, Honoré. Shall you see his family this time?”

“Happy thought! Why not all of us go out there for another good meal.
It will please them to see us and to hear from the lad, and then you
would like to make your adieux, wouldn’t you?”

“If I could but tell where we were going. Paulette--”

But Victor interrupted any information by crying out: “Don’t tell her,
Paulette. Don’t tell. It is a secret.”

Lucie gave her head, an indignant toss. “I think you are too horrid for
words,” she cried. “I shall not stay any longer. I will go to Odette,
and you two can keep your old secrets.” She flounced out of the room,
leaving Victor and Paulette laughing and whispering together.

However, she could not long keep out of humor with Victor; he was too
full of his jokes, in too rollicking a mood to be withstood, but Lucie
would not ask him another word about the secret, though she listened
to his plans for holiday making. It was only after he had gone that
she questioned Paulette. “I think I should see my father’s letter,” she
remarked with dignity.

Paulette smiled, lifted her eyebrows and shrugged her shoulders. “But
no, my child. I promised Monsieur Victor that I would not show it.”

“Then it must have some very unpleasant word in it.”

“On the contrary.”

“Of course that Victor likes to tease, but I did not think you,
Paulette, would be unkind to your Lucie.”

Paulette’s sly look of amusement vanished. “I, unkind? I would not be
that, my pigeon. Now, what would you? I promise monsieur that I will
not tell because he wishes to give you a pleasant surprise. I can say
so much, a very pleasant surprise. He is a good lad. Will you then
deprive him of this satisfaction, when he has done so much for us? He
is quite excited over this, and would be greatly disappointed if I
revealed the secret.”

Lucie sighed. “Very well, then, I will not insist. But can you tell how
soon I am to know?”

“Let me see. To-morrow we pack. We also go to this meal at the
restaurant. That is enough for the day. I think by the day after we
may begin our journey. At the end of the journey you will know.”

“Two days, two whole days. Well, there will be so much going on that I
will have no time to sit and think about it, there is that to say. We
must say good-by to Miss Lowndes. I wonder, by the way, if she knows?”

“Perhaps. I will ask Monsieur Victor.”

Victor satisfied them on this point when he appeared the next morning.
Yes, he had seen Mlle. Lowndes, a charming young lady. He liked blue
eyes. He made the last remark with a sly glance at Lucie.

“I suppose that is because you have blue eyes yourself,” she retorted.

“Perhaps. I do not know,” he returned serenely.

“And I suppose you let her into the secret.”

“It was what your father asked that I should do. He did not wish her
to concern herself about your affairs any longer than was necessary.
He knew that she would go to any amount of pains to relieve your
situation, but happily she turned all this over to me, your humble
Victor.”

“Humble!” scoffed Lucie, and Victor laughed.

The meal at the Restaurant Honoré, while not quite so great a success
as before, was merrier. Odette was of the party and was so excited
that she sparkled and bubbled over with fun, matching Victor’s saucy
speeches with wittier ones, till Lucie felt herself quite cast in the
shade. She was glad that Odette was having so good a time, but she was
rather aggrieved that she was not placed more to the fore. She was
still brooding over the secret, and more than once was far away in
thought while Odette and Victor chatted and made merry. She was not
sorry to leave Paris, but this going to the unknown was not in the
manner of an ordinary undertaking and she wondered what the new life
would be like.

She was so silent on the way home that Victor, too, became grave and
asked her very seriously: “What is the matter, Lucie? Are you really so
angry with me?”

She shook her head and sighed.

“Then what is it? Are you sorry to be leaving Paris, or have I said
something to hurt your feelings? I like blue eyes, of course, but I
really like brown ones better.” And then Lucie laughed.

“You foolish boy,” she said, “as if I would care for a silly thing like
that. Why should I care what sort of eyes you prefer?”

“But I should much prefer that you liked blue eyes. Do you?”

“I don’t know whether I do or not. It isn’t a matter that I ever think
about.”

“No,” returned Victor reflectively, “I don’t suppose you do--yet. I
hope we shall have fine weather for our journey to-morrow, don’t you?”

“Our journey? Are you going, too?”

“Of course. I promised your father that I would see you to the very end
of it, and take word back to him of how you fared.”

“You didn’t tell me that before.”

“No, but I tell you now. I hope you are going to be comfortable and
happy, happier than you have been here.”

“It has not been so bad of late, but I shall not be grieved to go. I am
longing for spring in the country. Is it real country to which we are
going? You can tell me that much, can’t you?”

“I think one would call it real country.”

“I shall like that better than any town, unless it were our own little
town, which after all is more like country than city.”

“I think you will like it. I hope so.”

“Is it far?”

“That depends upon what you call far. It would be quite a walk, not so
great a distance to drive, and still less if one went by train.”

“And how do we go?”

“By train. Now I shall not tell you another word or you will worm the
whole secret out of me. That Odette is a bright child.”

“She is older than I.”

“But you are still a child, very much of a child.”

“You are not much more yourself.”

“Oh, yes, or I would not be in the army.”

“You tell us very little about it. I heard more when you were talking
to Madame and Monsieur Pierre to-day than I have heard at all.”

“One does not want to talk when one is away from the trenches. One
likes to forget, although--” He paused and a far-off look came into his
eyes, making him look older, and giving Lucie a feeling that he was
distant in thought.

“Shall you be glad to get back?” she asked.

“I think so,” he answered slowly. “Yes, yes, of course. One is glad.
The others are there and one must get back to them.”

That was all the talk for the moment but it left Lucie with an
understanding of the other side of Victor’s character. Later she was to
appreciate even more clearly that he was made of finer stuff than she
imagined.

Miss Lowndes came in the afternoon, bringing little parting gifts to
all. “I am sorry to lose you three dears,” she said, “but I do not
despair of meeting you all again. You will write to me, Lucie, and
tell me all about everything. I am so interested. Really I shall miss
you very, very much. Perhaps I may have a chance to go your way one
of these days. We all like to get away to nice, quiet, safe places
for a rest when we are utterly worn out. I am coming to see you off
to-morrow, and I am glad you have such a reliable escort as that nice
Victor Guerin. I hope he will always look me up when he comes to town
on leave, and I hope he may be spared,” she added gravely.

That Victor might not be spared the fate of so many, many of the brave
_poilus_ had not occurred to Lucie. He was such a live person, that
it was impossible to connect him with anything tragic. She gave Miss
Lowndes a startled look, and when Victor came that evening all the
chill of her attitude of the morning had passed away. This might be the
last time. It was a dreadful thought, and she kept near him, hanging on
every word, fancying that the memory of them might some day be all that
she had left of this friendship.

For the last time she stood at the little window which looked down upon
the deserted garden. For the last time she saw the sunset gilding the
roofs and steeples of the city. The pigeons would still be strutting
down on the pavement below when she was far away. The street noises
would be as distinct to-morrow though she would not be hearing them.
The thoughts made her pensive yet not sad. Odette came and joined her.
Lucie put her arm around the slim waist of this little friend. “Are you
sorry that this is the last evening, Odette?” she asked.

“No, no, no,” replied Odette vehemently, “I am glad, thankful. I should
not be if I were not going with you and good Paulette. This place is
full of horrors, but it has given me you and Paulette so I do not hate
it; otherwise I should. My only happy memories of Paris will be those
in which you are.”

“Aren’t you glad that Victor is going with us?”

“Yes, I am if you are. He is a brave _garçon_, but I feel more at home
with that big Jean. I am used to those like him. He reminds me of
the men who worked in the fields near my village. I could never have
offered Nenette and Rintintin to Monsieur Victor, but to Jean, yes, it
was quite another thing; it was quite natural.”

“But you chattered away like a _babillarde_ at the restaurant this
morning.”

“Very true, but when I am excited I can do that. It is not that one is
afraid, but that one does not wish.”

The swallows circled high above the chimneys. The sun-shot clouds
turned to gray. The garden became an indistinct mass of grass and
foliage, and then the girls turned away.

They started early the next day. Paulette all in a twitter of
excitement. Had monsieur the safe-conducts? Where was her green
umbrella? They must not forget to give Mathilde the key. What was the
time? They must not be late. At last the station was reached. Miss
Lowndes came running up at the last moment with chocolate and fruit,
and, best of all, with a storybook in English for Lucie. The train
moved out. Paris was left behind.

Past towns and quiet villages, past green fields and budding forests,
and finally at a small station they left the train. There was a little
village beyond, and beyond the village stretched the cultivated ground
of farmsteads. Victor looked around and finally hailed an old man with
a _charrette_. “Ah, Jules, you are here. That is good.” He turned to
Lucie. “Will you go in the _charrette_ or will you walk?”

“How far is it?”

“About a mile, perhaps less. We can go in the _charrette_ and Jules
can come back for the luggage. The horse is rather old, you see, and
perhaps it would be best to spare him too heavy a load.”

“I think I should prefer to walk after sitting so long, and then one
can see the country better.”

“Very well. And you Paulette, you Odette?”

“We will walk, monsieur,” both replied.

So they started off at a brisk pace, the old man with the ancient horse
bringing up the rear. War had not touched this corner of the world
set apart from the raging of battles, the stir of camps. All was of a
Sabbath quiet, but there were only women and children working in the
fields. In the trees where young leaves were putting out, birds were
nesting. A lark soared singing overhead. It seemed as if he might at
last reach the drift of white clouds piled up in the blue. Presently
they came to a little shrine set by the roadside. With one accord all
knelt for a moment. There were tears in Lucie’s eyes when she arose.
“It has been so long since I saw one of those,” she whispered to Odette.

“Do I not know? Do I not know?” returned Odette in a tremulous voice.
“It is like coming home again.”

The little cart with the jogging horse passed them and went on.
Victor made a signal to Jules as he passed, which was answered by an
understanding nod.

“You seem to know that old man,” remarked Lucie.

“I have seen him once or twice before,” responded Victor.

Paulette gave a little chuckle which quickly changed to a clearing of
the throat as Lucie looked at her sharply. “It seems so like my old
home of childhood that I laugh,” she explained.

“Are you tired? Would you like to rest a moment?” asked Victor.

“How much farther is it?” asked Lucie.

“We have come about half the distance. At the top of the next hill we
shall be able to see the house.”

“Then you know it. You have been here before.”

“Oh, yes, several times. That is why I could conduct you, because I
knew the way.”

Lucie stood still and lifted her face to the sky. “How lovely it all
is; those floating fleecy clouds, this sweet-smelling air, the birds,
the trees. We shall be much happier here; I am sure of it, aren’t you,
Paulette?”

“It is what I have desired, to go to the country,” she replied. “Let us
get on, my child.”

So they traveled on. At the top of the hill Victor pointed out a
low, long white house set in an orchard, and surrounded by smaller
buildings. “That is where we go,” Victor told the others.

“I hope they want us,” said Lucie. “It seems strange to be going to
people I never saw before, and whom I know nothing at all about. It is
very good of them to take us in.”

“They will be glad enough to have helpers in the fields, you may be
sure of that.”

“But I shall not be that exactly, shall I?”

“Well, no; you will be a guest, rather